# Garbage Collection

Table of contents

- [Garbage Collection](#garbage-collection)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [Mark and Sweep](#mark-and-sweep)
  - [Memory Leaks](#memory-leaks)

## Intro

JavaScript is a garbage collected language. If you allocate memory inside of a function, JavaScript will automatically remove it from the memory heap when the function is done being called. However, that does not mean you can forget about memory leaks. No system is perfect, so it is important to always remember memory management. JavaScript completes garbage collection with a mark and sweep method.

## Mark and Sweep

Mark and Sweep algorithm looks out for objects 'which are unreachable' rather than objects 'which are no longer needed'.

The algorithm actually goes through 3 important steps:

- Root: In general, a root is a global variable that is used in the code.A window object in JavaScript can act as a root. This algorithm uses the root to find whether the objects are reachable or unreachable.
- The algorithm then monitors every root and also their children. While monitoring, some objects which are reachable are marked and remaining objects which are unreachable are unmarked, based on the provided conditions.
- The objects which are unmarked will be garbage collected.

## Memory Leaks

A memory leak can be defined as a piece of memory that is no longer being used or required by an application but for some reason is not returned back to the pool of free memory. It leads to the diminished performance of your application by reducing the amount of memory available for it to perform tasks and could eventually lead to crashes or freezes.

The tree common memory leaks:

- Accidentally set global variables
- Don’t close eventListeners or setIntervals
- Reference out of the DOM
