# Execution Context

Table of contents

- [Execution Context](#execution-context)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [Global Execution Context](#global-execution-context)
    - [Creation Phase](#creation-phase)
    - [Executing Phase](#executing-phase)
  - [Function Execution Context](#function-execution-context)
    - [Creation Phase](#creation-phase-1)
    - [Executing Phase](#executing-phase-1)
  - [The Keyword 'arguments'](#the-keyword-arguments)
  - [Arrow Functions](#arrow-functions)

## Intro

Generally speaking, a context represents a space in which something is done. Therefore an execution context is the space in which the code is executed. The thread of execution an the memory form together this context.

- **Thread of Execution:** It parses and executes the code line by line
- **Memory:** It is used to store our data.

There are two types of execution context in JavaScript, global or function. There are two stages as well to each context, the creation and executing phase.

## Global Execution Context

As the JavaScript engine starts to read your code, it creates something called the global execution context. It is comprised of a thread of execution and the global variable environment.

### Creation Phase

- global object created
- initializes 'this' keyword to global object
- hoisting

```javascript
this;
window;
this === window;

// Window {...}
// Window {...}
// true
```

### Executing Phase

- global variable environment created, meaning that memory space for var- variables and functions is generated.
- initializes all var- variables to undefined and places them with any functions into memory, if declared in the global execution context

## Function Execution Context

Only when a function is invoked, does a function execution context get created.

### Creation Phase

- arguments object created with any arguments
- initializes 'this' keyword to point to the called or to the global object if not specified
- hoisting

### Executing Phase

- function variable environment created, meaning that memory space for var- variables and functions is generated.
- initializes all var- variables to undefined and places them with any functions into memory, if declared in the current function execution context

```javascript
// Function Execution Context creates arguments object and points 'this' to the object that called the function.

function showArgs(arg1, arg2) {
  console.log('arguments: ', arguments);
  return `argument 1 is: ${arg1} and argument 2 is: ${arg2}`;
}

showArgs('hello', 'world');

// arguments: { 0: 'hello', 1: 'world' }
// first argument is 'hello' and second argument is 'world'

function noArgs() {
  console.log('arguments: ', arguments);
}

noArgs();

// arguments: {}
// even though there are no arguments, the object is still created
```

## The Keyword 'arguments'

The keyword arguments can be dangerous to use in your code as is. In ES6, a few methods were introduced that can help better use arguments.

```javascript
function showArgs1(arg1, arg2) {
  console.log('arguments: ', arguments);
}

showArgs1('hello', 'world');

// arguments: {0:'hello', 1:'world'}

function showArgs2(...args) {
  console.log('arguments: ', args);
  console.log(Array.from(arguments));
  return `${args[0]} ${args[1]}`;
}

showArgs2('hello', 'world');

// arguments: ['hello', 'world']
// ['hello', 'world']
// 'hello world'
```

## Arrow Functions

Some people think of arrow functions as just being syntactic sugar for a regular function, but arrow functions work a bit differently than a regular function. They are a compact alternative to a regular function, but also without its own bindings to this, arguments, super, or new.target keywords. Arrow functions cannot be used as constructors and are not the best option for methods.

```javascript
var obj = {
  i: 10,
  b: () => console.log(this.i, this),
  c: function () {
    console.log(this.i, this);
  },
};

obj.b();
// prints: undefined, Window {...}
obj.c();
// prints: 10, obj {...}
```
