# Selectors

Table of Contents

- [Selectors](#selectors)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [Write CSS in HTML File](#write-css-in-html-file)
  - [Inline Styles](#inline-styles)
  - [Separating HTML Code from CSS Code](#separating-html-code-from-css-code)
    - [The -link- Element](#the--link--element)
  - [Selectors](#selectors-1)
    - [Type Selector](#type-selector)
    - [Class Selector](#class-selector)
    - [ID Selectors](#id-selectors)
    - [Groups of CSS Selectors](#groups-of-css-selectors)
    - [Descendant Selector](#descendant-selector)
    - [Child Selector](#child-selector)
    - [General Sibling Selector](#general-sibling-selector)
    - [Adjacent Sibling Selector](#adjacent-sibling-selector)
    - [Chaining Selectors](#chaining-selectors)
  - [Selector Specificity](#selector-specificity)
  - [The !important Rule](#the-important-rule)
  - [What Selectors Win Out?](#what-selectors-win-out)

## Intro

CSS, or Cascading Style Sheets, is a language that is used in combination with HTML that customizes how HTML elements will appear. CSS can define styles and change the layout and design of a sheet.

## Write CSS in HTML File

CSS code can be written in an HTML file by enclosing the code in -style- tags. Code surrounded by -style- tags will be interpreted as CSS syntax.

```html
<head>
  <style>
    h1 {
      color: blue;
    }
  </style>
</head>
```

## Inline Styles

CSS styles can be directly added to HTML elements by using the style attribute in the element’s opening tag. Each style declaration is ended with a semicolon. Styles added in this manner are known as inline styles.

```html
<p style="color: blue; font-size: 18px;">Blue</p>
```

## Separating HTML Code from CSS Code

It is common practice to separate content code in HTML files from styling code in CSS files. This can help make the code easier to maintain, by keeping the syntax for each file separate, and any changes to the content or styling can be made in their respective files.

The extension for CSS files is .css. These can be linked to an HTML file using a -link- tag in the -head- section.

```html
<head>
  <link href="style.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
```

### The -link- Element

The -link- element is used to link HTML documents to external resources like CSS files. It commonly uses:

- **href** attribute to specify the URL to the external resource
- **rel** attribute to specify the relationship of the linked document to the current document
- **type** attribute to define the type of content being linked

```html
<link href="./path/to/stylesheet/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
```

## Selectors

### Type Selector

CSS type selectors are used to match all elements of a given type or tag name. Unlike for HTML syntax, we do not include the angle brackets when using type selectors for tag names. When using type selectors, elements are matched regardless of their nesting level in the HTML.

```css
p {
}
```

### Class Selector

s
CSS class selectors
The CSS class selector matches elements based on the contents of their class attribute. For selecting elements having calendar-cell as the value of the class attribute, a . needs to be prepended.

```css
.calendar-cell {
}
```

### ID Selectors

The CSS ID selector matches elements based on the contents of their id attribute. The values of id attribute should be unique in the entire DOM. For selecting the element having job-title as the value of the id attribute, a # needs to be prepended.

```css
#job-title {
}
```

### Groups of CSS Selectors

Match multiple selectors to the same CSS rule, using a comma-separated list. In this example, the text for both h1 and h2 is set to red.

```css
h1,
h2 {
}
```

### Descendant Selector

The CSS descendant selector combinator is used to match elements that are descended from another matched selector. They are denoted by a single space between each selector and the descended selector. All matching elements are selected regardless of the nesting level in the HTML.

```css
div p {
}
```

### Child Selector

The CSS child selector combinator is used to target all elements whitin a parent element.

```css
div > p {
}

/*Selects all <p> elements where the parent is a <div> element*/
```

### General Sibling Selector

The CSS general sibling selector combinator is used to target all elements that are preceded by another element.

```css
p ~ ul {
}

/*Selects every <ul> element that is preceded by a <p> element*/
```

### Adjacent Sibling Selector

The CSS adjacent sibling selector combinator is used to target the first element that is placed immediately after another element.

```css
div + p {
}

/*Selects the first <p> element that is placed immediately after <div> elements*/
```

### Chaining Selectors

CSS selectors can be chained so that rule sets apply only to elements that match all criteria. For instance, to select -h3- elements that also have the section-heading class, the selector h3.section-heading can be used.

```css
h3.section-heading {
}

.section-heading.button {
}
```

## Selector Specificity

Specificity is a ranking system that is used when there are multiple conflicting property values that point to the same element. When determining which rule to apply, the selector with the highest specificity wins out. The most specific selector type is the ID selector, followed by class selectors, followed by type selectors. In this example, only color: blue will be implemented as it has an ID selector whereas color: red has a type selector.

```css
h1#header {
  color: blue;
} /* implemented */

h1 {
  color: red;
} /* Not implemented */
```

## The !important Rule

The CSS !important rule is used on declarations to override any other declarations for a property and ignore selector specificity. !important rules will ensure that a specific declaration always applies to the matched elements. However, generally it is good to avoid using !important as bad practice.

```css
#column-one {
  width: 200px !important;
}

.post-title {
  color: blue !important;
}
```

## What Selectors Win Out?

What selectors win out in the cascade depends on:

- specificity
- importance (!important)
- source order
