# Animations

Table of Contents

- [Animations](#animations)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [Animation Name](#animation-name)
  - [Animation Duration](#animation-duration)
  - [Animation Timing Function](#animation-timing-function)
    - [Cubic-Bezier Functions](#cubic-bezier-functions)
  - [Animation Delay](#animation-delay)
  - [Animation Iteration Count](#animation-iteration-count)
  - [Animation Direction](#animation-direction)
  - [Animation Shorthand Property](#animation-shorthand-property)
  - [@Keyframes](#keyframes)
  - [Animation on Hover](#animation-on-hover)
  - [Animation Fill Mode](#animation-fill-mode)
  - [Animation Play State](#animation-play-state)
  - [Create Movement](#create-movement)

## Intro

To animate an element, you need to know about the animation properties and the @keyframes rule. The animation properties control how the animation should behave and the @keyframes rule controls what happens during that animation. There are eight animation properties in total.

## Animation Name

The animation-name property sets the name of the animation, which is later used by @keyframes to tell CSS which rules go with which animations.

## Animation Duration

The animation-duration property sets the length of time for the animation.

## Animation Timing Function

In CSS animations, the animation-timing-function property controls how quickly an animated element changes over the duration of the animation. If the animation is a car moving from point A to point B in a given time (your animation-duration), the animation-timing-function says how the car accelerates and decelerates over the course of the drive.

There are a number of predefined keywords available for popular options. For example, the default value is **ease**, which starts slow, speeds up in the middle, and then slows down again in the end. Other options include **ease-out**, which is quick in the beginning then slows down, **ease-in**, which is slow in the beginning, then speeds up at the end, or **linear**, which applies a constant animation speed throughout.

### Cubic-Bezier Functions

CSS offers an option other than keywords (e.g. ease-in) that provides even finer control over how the animation plays out, through the use of Bezier curves.

In CSS animations, Bezier curves are used with the cubic-bezier function. The shape of the curve represents how the animation plays out. The curve lives on a 1 by 1 coordinate system. The X-axis of this coordinate system is the duration of the animation (think of it as a time scale), and the Y-axis is the change in the animation.

The cubic-bezier function consists of four main points that sit on this 1 by 1 grid: p0, p1, p2, and p3. p0 and p3 are set for you - they are the beginning and end points which are always located respectively at the origin (0, 0) and (1, 1). You set the x and y values for the other two points, and where you place them in the grid dictates the shape of the curve for the animation to follow. This is done in CSS by declaring the x and y values of the p1 and p2 "anchor" points in the form: (x1, y1, x2, y2). Pulling it all together, here's an example of a Bezier curve in CSS code:

**animation-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.25, 0.25, 0.75, 0.75);**

In the example above, the x and y values are equivalent for each point (x1 = 0.25 = y1 and x2 = 0.75 = y2), which if you remember from geometry class, results in a line that extends from the origin to point (1, 1). This animation is a linear change of an element during the length of an animation, and is the same as using the linear keyword. In other words, it changes at a constant speed.

## Animation Delay

The animation-delay property specifies a delay for the start of an animation.

## Animation Iteration Count

Another animation property is the animation-iteration-count, which allows you to control how many times you would like to loop through the animation. Here's an example:

animation-iteration-count: 3;

In this case the animation will stop after running 3 times, but it's possible to make the animation run continuously by setting that value to infinite.

## Animation Direction

The animation-direction property specifies whether an animation should be played forwards, backwards or in alternate cycles.

The animation-direction property can have the following values:

- **normal** - The animation is played as normal (forwards). This is default
- **reverse** - The animation is played in reverse direction (backwards)
- **alternate** - The animation is played forwards first, then backwards
- **alternate-reverse** - The animation is played backwards first, then forwards

## Animation Shorthand Property

The example below uses six of the animation properties:

```css
div {
  animation-name: example;
  animation-duration: 5s;
  animation-timing-function: linear;
  animation-delay: 2s;
  animation-iteration-count: infinite;
  animation-direction: alternate;
}
```

The same animation effect as above can be achieved by using the shorthand animation property:

```css
div {
  animation: example 5s linear 2s infinite alternate;
}
```

## @Keyframes

@keyframes is how to specify exactly what happens within the animation over the duration. This is done by giving CSS properties for specific "frames" during the animation, with percentages ranging from 0% to 100%. If you compare this to a movie, the CSS properties for 0% is how the element displays in the opening scene. The CSS properties for 100% is how the element appears at the end, right before the credits roll. Then CSS applies the magic to transition the element over the given duration to act out the scene. Here's an example to illustrate the usage of @keyframes and the animation properties:

```css
#anim {
  animation-name: colorful;
  animation-duration: 3s;
}

@keyframes colorful {
  0% {
    background-color: blue;
  }
  50% {
    background-color: green;
  }
  100% {
    background-color: yellow;
  }
}
```

For the element with the anim id, the code snippet above sets the animation-name to colorful and sets the animation-duration to 3 seconds. Then the @keyframes rule links to the animation properties with the name colorful. It sets the color to blue at the beginning of the animation (0%) which will transition to yellow by the end of the animation (100%). You aren't limited to only beginning-end transitions, you can set properties for the element for any percentage between 0% and 100%.

## Animation on Hover

You can use CSS @keyframes to change the property of a button in its hover state.

Here's an example of changing the width of an image on hover:

```css
<style>
  img:hover {
    animation-name: width;
    animation-duration: 500ms;
  }

  @keyframes width {
    100% {
      width: 40px;
    }
  }
</style>
```

## Animation Fill Mode

That's great, but it doesn't work right yet. Notice above how the animation resets after 500ms has passed, causing the button to revert back to the original color. You want the button to stay highlighted.

This can be done by setting the animation-fill-mode property to forwards. The animation-fill-mode specifies the style applied to an element when the animation has finished.

The animation-fill-mode property can have the following values:

- **none** - Default value. Animation will not apply any styles to the element before or after it is executing
- **forwards** - The element will retain the style values that is set by the last keyframe (depends on animation-direction and animation-iteration-count)
- **backwards** - The element will get the style values that is set by the first keyframe (depends on animation-direction), and retain this during the animation-delay period
- **both** - The animation will follow the rules for both forwards and backwards, extending the animation properties in both directions

## Animation Play State

The animation-play-state CSS property sets whether an animation is running or paused.

- **animation-play-state:** paused;
- **animation-play-state:** running;

Resuming a paused animation will start the animation from where it left off at the time it was paused, rather than starting over from the beginning of the animation sequence.

## Create Movement

When elements have a specified position, such as fixed or relative, the CSS offset properties right, left, top, and bottom can be used in animation rules to create movement.

As shown in the example below, you can push the item downwards then upwards by setting the top property of the 50% keyframe to 50px, but having it set to 0px for the first (0%) and the last (100%) keyframe.

```css
@keyframes rainbow {
  0% {
    background-color: blue;
    top: 0px;
  }
  50% {
    background-color: green;
    top: 50px;
  }
  100% {
    background-color: yellow;
    top: 0px;
  }
}
```
