# Visual Rules and Variables

Table of Contents

- [Visual Rules and Variables](#visual-rules-and-variables)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [CSS Rule Sets](#css-rule-sets)
    - [Font Size](#font-size)
    - [Font Weight](#font-weight)
    - [Font Style](#font-style)
    - [Font Family](#font-family)
    - [Line-Height](#line-height)
    - [Foreground Text Color](#foreground-text-color)
    - [Background Color](#background-color)
    - [Opacity](#opacity)
    - [Background Image](#background-image)
      - [Resource URLs](#resource-urls)
    - [Text Align](#text-align)
    - [Text-Transform](#text-transform)
    - [Text-Decoration](#text-decoration)
      - [Text-Decoration-Line](#text-decoration-line)
      - [Text-Decoration-Color](#text-decoration-color)
      - [Text-Decoration-Style](#text-decoration-style)
      - [Text-Decoration-Thickness](#text-decoration-thickness)
    - [Text- or Box-Shadow](#text--or-box-shadow)
    - [Linear Gradient](#linear-gradient)
    - [Repeating Linear Gradient](#repeating-linear-gradient)
    - [The Transform Property](#the-transform-property)
      - [Transform Scale](#transform-scale)
      - [Transform Translate](#transform-translate)
      - [Transform Skew](#transform-skew)
      - [Transform Rotate](#transform-rotate)
    - [Make Elements Only Visible to a Screen Reader](#make-elements-only-visible-to-a-screen-reader)
  - [CSS Variables](#css-variables)
    - [Fallback Value](#fallback-value)
    - [Inherit Variables](#inherit-variables)

## Intro

In CSS, a declaration is the key-value pair of a CSS property and its value. CSS declarations are used to set style properties and construct rules to apply to individual or groups of elements. The property name and value are separated by a colon, and the entire declaration must be terminated by a semi-colon.

```css
p {
  text-align: center;
  color: purple;
  width: 100px;
}
```

## CSS Rule Sets

A CSS rule set contains one or more selectors and one or more declarations. The selector(s), which in this example is h1, points to an HTML element. The declaration(s), which in this example are color: blue and text-align: center style the element with a property and value. The rule set is the main building block of a CSS sheet.

```css
h1 {
  color: blue;
  text-align: center;
}
```

### Font Size

The font-size CSS property is used to set text sizes. Font size values can be many different units or types such as pixels.

### Font Weight

The font-weight CSS property can be used to set the weight (boldness) of text. The provided value can be a keyword such as bold or normal.

### Font Style

The font-style CSS property sets whether a font should be styled with a normal, italic, or oblique face from its font-family.

- font-style: normal;
- font-style: italic;
- font-style: oblique;
- font-style: oblique 40deg;

/_To emphasize text, you can also use the em tag._/

### Font Family

The font-family CSS property is used to specify the typeface in a rule set. Fonts must be available to the browser to display correctly, either on the computer or linked as a web font. If a font value is not available, browsers will display their default font. When using a multi-word font name, it is best practice to wrap them in quotes.

### Line-Height

CSS offers the line-height property to change the height of each line in a block of text. As the name suggests, it changes the amount of vertical space that each line of text gets.

### Foreground Text Color

Using the color property, foreground text color of an element can be set in CSS. The value can be a valid color name supported in CSS like green or blue. Also, 3 digit or 6 digit color code like #22f or #2a2aff can be used to set the color.

### Background Color

The background-color CSS property controls the background color of elements.

### Opacity

The opacity CSS property can be used to control the transparency of an element. The value of this property ranges from 0 (transparent) to 1 (opaque).

### Background Image

The background-image CSS property sets the background image of an element. An image URL should be provided in the syntax url("moon.jpg") as the value of the property.

```css
body {
  background: url(image.jpg) no-repeat center center fixed;
  background-size: cover;
}
```

#### Resource URLs

In CSS, the url() function is used to wrap resource URLs. These can be applied to several properties such as the background-image.

### Text Align

The text-align CSS property can be used to set the text alignment of inline contents. This property can be set to these values: left, right, or center.

### Text-Transform

The text-transform property in CSS is used to change the appearance of text. It's a convenient way to make sure text on a webpage appears consistently, without having to change the text content of the actual HTML elements.

- lowercase: "transform me"
- uppercase: "TRANSFORM ME"
- capitalize: "Transform Me"
- initial: Use the default value
- inherit: Use the text-transform value from the parent element
- none: Default - Use the original text

### Text-Decoration

The text-decoration shorthand CSS property sets the appearance of decorative lines on text. It is a shorthand for text-decoration-line, text-decoration-color, text-decoration-style, and the newer text-decoration-thickness property.

#### Text-Decoration-Line

The text-decoration-line CSS property sets the kind of decoration that is used on text in an element, such as an underline or overline.

- text-decoration-line: underline;
- text-decoration-line: overline;
- text-decoration-line: line-through;
- text-decoration-line: underline overline;
- text-decoration-line: underline line-through;

/_To underline text, you can also use the -u- tag. To strikethrough text, which is when a horizontal line cuts across the characters, you can use the -s- tag._/

#### Text-Decoration-Color

The text-decoration-color CSS property sets the color of decorations added to text by text-decoration-line.The color applies to decorations, such as underlines, overlines, strikethroughs, and wavy lines like those used to mark misspellings, in the scope of the property's value.

- text-decoration-color: red;
- text-decoration-color: #21ff21;
- text-decoration-color: rgb(255, 90, 255);
- text-decoration-color: hsl(70, 100%, 40%);
- text-decoration-color: currentColor;

#### Text-Decoration-Style

The text-decoration-style CSS property sets the style of the lines specified by text-decoration-line. The style applies to all lines that are set with text-decoration-line.

- text-decoration-style: solid;
- text-decoration-style: double;
- text-decoration-style: dotted;
- text-decoration-style: dashed;
- text-decoration-style: wavy;

#### Text-Decoration-Thickness

The text-decoration-thickness CSS property sets the stroke thickness of the decoration line that is used on text in an element, such as a line-through, underline, or overline.

- text-decoration-thickness: auto;
- text-decoration-thickness: 0.1em;
- text-decoration-thickness: 3px;
- text-decoration-thickness: 10%;
- text-decoration-thickness: inherit;

### Text- or Box-Shadow

The text(box)-shadow property applies one or more shadows to an element.

It takes values for:

- offset-x (how far to push the shadow horizontally from the element),
- offset-y (how far to push the shadow vertically from the element),
- blur-radius,
- spread-radius and
- color, in that order.

The blur-radius and spread-radius values are optional.

Multiple text(box)-shadows can be created by using commas to separate properties of each box-shadow element.

```css
div {
  text(box)-shadow: 2px 2px 2px 1px rgba(255, 0, 0, 0.2), 1px 1px 1px 2px rgba(0, 255, 0, 0.8);
}
```

You can also use the text-shadow property to create a plain border around some text (without shadows):

```css
h1 {
  color: yellow;
  text-shadow: -1px 0 black, 0 1px black, 1px 0 black, 0 -1px black;
}
```

### Linear Gradient

Applying a color on HTML elements is not limited to one flat hue. CSS provides the ability to use color transitions, otherwise known as gradients, on elements. This is accessed through the background property's linear-gradient() function. Here is the general syntax:

```css
div {
  background: linear-gradient(
    gradient_direction,
    color 1,
    color 2,
    color 3,
    ...
  );
}
```

The first argument specifies the direction from which color transition starts - it can be stated as a degree, where 90deg makes a horizontal gradient (from left to right) and 45deg makes a diagonal gradient (from bottom left to top right). The following arguments specify the order of colors used in the gradient.

### Repeating Linear Gradient

The repeating-linear-gradient() function is very similar to linear-gradient() with the major difference that it repeats the specified gradient pattern.

In the example demonstrated below, the gradient starts with the color yellow at 0 pixels which blends into the second color blue at 40 pixels away from the start. Since the next color stop is also at 40 pixels, the gradient immediately changes to the third color green, which itself blends into the fourth color value red as that is 80 pixels away from the beginning of the gradient.

```css
div {
  background: repeating-linear-gradient(
    90deg,
    yellow 0px,
    blue 40px,
    green 40px,
    red 80px
  );
}
```

For this example, it helps to think about the color stops as pairs where every two colors blend together:

0px [yellow -- blend -- blue] 40px [green -- blend -- red] 80px

If every two color stop values are the same color, the blending isn't noticeable because it's between the same color, followed by a hard transition to the next color, so you end up with stripes.

### The Transform Property

The transform property has a variety of functions that let you scale, move, rotate, skew, etc., your elements.

#### Transform Scale

To change the scale of an element, CSS has the transform property, along with its scale() function. The following code example doubles the size of all the paragraph elements on the page:

```css
p {
  transform: scale(2);
}
```

- **scale(x,y):** Defines a 2D scale transformation
- **scale3d(x,y,z):** Defines a 3D scale transformation
- **scaleX(x):** Defines a scale transformation by giving a value for the X-axis
- **scaleY(y):** Defines a scale transformation by giving a value for the Y-axis
- **scaleZ(z):** Defines a 3D scale transformation by giving a value for the Z-axis

#### Transform Translate

The translate() CSS function repositions an element in the horizontal and/or vertical directions. Its result is a -transform-function- data type. The translate3d() CSS function repositions an element in 3D space.

- **translate(x,y):** Defines a 2D translation
- **translate3d(x,y,z):** Defines a 3D translation
- **translateX(x):** Defines a translation, using only the value for the X-axis
- **translateY(y):** Defines a translation, using only the value for the Y-axis
- **translateZ(z):** Defines a 3D translation, using only the value for the Z-axis

```css
.moved {
  transform: translate(10px);

  /*Equal to: translateX(10px) or translate(10px, 0)*/
}
```

#### Transform Skew

The next function of the transform property is skew(), which defines a 2D skew transformation along the X- and the Y-axis

- **skew(x-angle, y-angle):** Defines a 2D skew transformation along the X- and the Y-axis
- **skewX(angle):** Defines a 2D skew transformation along the X-axis
- **skewY(angle):** Defines a 2D skew transformation along the Y-axis

The following code skews the paragraph element by -32 degrees along the X-axis.

```css
p {
  transform: skewX(-32deg);
}
```

The skew() function is specified with either one or two values. If you only specify one value it is used for the x-axis and there will be no skewing on the y-axis.

```css
div {
  transform: skew(ax); /*or*/
  transform: skew(ax, ay);
}
```

#### Transform Rotate

The rotate() CSS function defines a transformation that rotates an element around a fixed point on the 2D plane, without deforming it.

The fixed point that the element rotates around is also known as the transform origin. This defaults to the center of the element, but you can set your own custom transform origin using the **transform-origin** property.

The amount of rotation created by rotate() is specified by an angle. If positive, the movement will be clockwise; if negative, it will be counter-clockwise. A rotation by 180° is called point reflection.

```css
.rotated {
  transform: rotate(45deg);
}
```

- **rotate(angle):** Defines a 2D rotation, the angle is specified in the parameter
- **rotate3d(x,y,z,angle):** Defines a 3D rotation
- **rotateX(angle):** Defines a 3D rotation along the X-axis
- **rotateY(angle):** Defines a 3D rotation along the Y-axis
- **rotateZ(angle):** Defines a 3D rotation along the Z-axis

### Make Elements Only Visible to a Screen Reader

CSS's magic can also improve accessibility on your page when you want to visually hide content meant only for screen readers. This happens when information is in a visual format (like a chart), but screen reader users need an alternative presentation (like a table) to access the data. CSS is used to position the screen reader-only elements off the visual area of the browser window.

Here's an example of the CSS rules that accomplish this:

```css
.sr-only {
  position: absolute;
  left: -10000px;
  width: 1px;
  height: 1px;
  top: auto;
  overflow: hidden;
}
```

**Note:** The following CSS approaches will NOT do the same thing:

- display: none; or visibility: hidden; hides content for everyone, including screen reader users
- Zero values for pixel sizes, such as width: 0px; height: 0px; removes that element from the flow of your document, meaning screen readers will ignore it

## CSS Variables

To create a CSS variable, you just need to give it a name with two hyphens in front of it and assign it a value like this:

```
--penguin-skin: gray;
```

After you create your variable, you can assign its value to other CSS properties by referencing the name you gave it.

```
background: var(--penguin-skin);
```

### Fallback Value

When using your variable as a CSS property value, you can attach a fallback value that your browser will revert to if the given variable is invalid.

_Note: This fallback is not used to increase browser compatibility, and it will not work on IE browsers. Rather, it is used so that the browser has a color to display if it cannot find your variable._

Here's how you do it:

```
background: var(--penguin-skin, black);
```

### Inherit Variables

When you create a variable, it is available for you to use inside the selector in which you create it. It also is available in any of that selector's descendants. This happens because CSS variables are inherited, just like ordinary properties.

To make use of inheritance, CSS variables are often defined in the :root element.

:root is a pseudo-class selector that matches the root element of the document, usually the html element. By creating your variables in :root, they will be available globally and can be accessed from any other selector in the style sheet.

When you create your variables in :root they will set the value of that variable for the whole page.

You can then over-write these variables by setting them again within a specific element.
