# CSS Flexbox

Table of Contents

- [CSS Flexbox](#css-flexbox)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [Display: inline-flex Property](#display-inline-flex-property)
  - [The flex Property](#the-flex-property)
    - [The flex-grow Property](#the-flex-grow-property)
    - [The flex-shrink Property](#the-flex-shrink-property)
    - [The flex-basis Property](#the-flex-basis-property)
  - [The flex-direction Property](#the-flex-direction-property)
  - [The flex-wrap Property](#the-flex-wrap-property)
  - [The flex-flow Property](#the-flex-flow-property)
  - [The justify-content Property](#the-justify-content-property)
  - [The align-items Property](#the-align-items-property)
  - [The align-content Property](#the-align-content-property)

## Intro

The CSS display: flex property sets an HTML element as a block level flex container which takes the full width of its parent container. Any child elements that reside within the flex container are called flex items.

Flex items change their size and location in response to the size and position of their parent container.

## Display: inline-flex Property

The CSS display: inline-flex property sets an HTML element as an inline flex container which takes only the required space for the content. Any child elements that reside within the flex container are caleld flex items. Flex items change their size and location in response to the size and position of their parent container.

```css
.container {
  display: inline-flex;
}
```

## The flex Property

The flex CSS property specifies how a flex item will grow or shrink so as to fit within the space available in its flex container. This is a shorthand property that declares the following properties in order on a single line:

- flex-grow
- flex-shrink
- flex-basis

```css
.first-flex-item {
  flex-grow: 2;
  flex-shrink: 1;
  flex-basis: 150px;
}

/* Three properties declared on three lines: */

.first-flex-item {
  flex: 2 1 150px;
}

/* Same three properties declared on one line: */
```

### The flex-grow Property

The CSS flex-grow property allows flex items to grow as the parent container increases in size horizontally. This property accepts numerical values and specifies how an element should grow relative to its sibling elements based on this value.

The default value for this property is 0.

```css
.panelA {
  width: 100px;
  flex-grow: 1;
}

.panelB {
  width: 100px;
  flex-grow: 2;
}

/* The panelB element will stretch twice wider than the panelA element */
```

### The flex-shrink Property

The CSS flex-shrink property determines how an element should shrink as the parent container decreases in size horizontally. This property accepts a numerical value which specifies the ratios for the shrinkage of a flex item compared to its other sibling elements within its parent container.

The default value for this property is 1.

```css
.container {
  display: flex;
}

.item-a {
  flex-shrink: 1;
}

/* The value 1 indicates that the item should shrink. */

.item-b {
  flex-shrink: 2;
}

/* The value 2 indicates that the item should shrink twice than the element item-a. */
```

### The flex-basis Property

The flex-basis CSS property sets the initial base size for a flex item before any other space is distributed according to other flex properties.

```css
div {
  flex-basis: auto;
}

/*Default Syntax*/
```

## The flex-direction Property

The flex-direction CSS property specifies how flex items are placed in the flex container - either vertically or horizontally. This property also determines whether those flex items appear in order or in reverse order.

```css
div {
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: row-reverse;
}
```

## The flex-wrap Property

The flex-wrap property specifies whether flex items should wrap or not. This applies to flex items only. Once you tell your container to flex-wrap, wrapping become a priority over shrinking. Flex items will only begin to wrap if their combined flex-basis value is greater than the current size of their flex container.

```css
.container {
  display: flex;
  flex-wrap: wrap-reverse;
  width: 200px;
}
```

## The flex-flow Property

The CSS property flex-flow provides a shorthand for the properties flex-direction and flex-wrap. The value of the flex-direction property specifies the direction of the flex items and the value of the flex-wrap property allows flex items to move to the next line instead of shrinking to fit inside the flex container. The flex-flow property should be declared on the flex container.

```css
.container {
  display: flex;
  flex-flow: column wrap;
}

/*In this example code block, "column" is the value of the property "flex-direction" and "wrap" is the value of the property "flex-wrap".*/
```

## The justify-content Property

The CSS justify-content flexbox property defines how the browser distributes space between and around content items along the main-axis of their container. This is when the content items do not use all available space on the major-axis (horizontally).

justify-content can have the values of:

- flex-start
- flex-end
- center
- space-between
- space-around

```css
div {
  display: flex;
  justify-content: center;
}

/* Items based at the center of the parent container: */

div {
  display: flex;
  justify-content: flex-start;
}

/* Items based at the upper-left side of the parent container: */
```

## The align-items Property

When working with CSS flexbox align-items is used to align flex items vertically within a parent container.

## The align-content Property

The align-content property modifies the behavior of the flex-wrap property. It determines how to space rows from top to bottom (ie. along the cross axis). Multiple rows of items are needed for this property to take effect.
