# Pseudo-Classes

Table of Contents

- [Pseudo-Classes](#pseudo-classes)
  - [Intro](#intro)
    - [:hover](#hover)
    - [::before (:before)](#before-before)
    - [::after (:after)](#after-after)

## Intro

Pseudo-classes are CSS classes used to define the state of an element. They target elements that can’t be targeted with combinators or simple selectors like id or class. They are used to select elements based on their attributes, states, and relative position.

A pseudo-class has a simple syntax. They are identified by a colon (:) placed just after a CSS selector.

```css
selector:pseudo-class {
  property: value;
}
```

### :hover

The :hover CSS pseudo-class matches when the user interacts with an element with a pointing device, but does not necessarily activate it. It is generally triggered when the user hovers over an element with the cursor (mouse pointer).

```css
a:hover {
  color: orange;
}

/* Selects any <a> element when "hovered" */
```

### ::before (:before)

In CSS, ::before creates a pseudo-element that is the first child of the selected element. It is often used to add cosmetic content to an element with the content property. It is inline by default.

```css
a::before {
  content: '♥';
}

/* Add a heart before links */
```

### ::after (:after)

In CSS, ::after creates a pseudo-element that is the last child of the selected element. It is often used to add cosmetic content to an element with the content property. It is inline by default.

```css
a::after {
  content: '→';
}

/* Add an arrow after links */
```

/_When the ::before and ::after pseudo-elements are used to make shapes, the content property is still required, but it's set to an empty string._/
