# Transitions

Table of Contents

- [Transitions](#transitions)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [Duration](#duration)
  - [Delay](#delay)
  - [Timing Function](#timing-function)
  - [Shorthand](#shorthand)
  - [Combinations](#combinations)
  - [The Keyword All](#the-keyword-all)

## Intro

After a website is displayed, the visual appearances of various elements can change for many reasons.These changes are a type of state change. CSS transitions allow us to control the timing of visual state changes. We can control the following four aspects of an element’s transition:

- Which CSS properties transition
- How long a transition lasts
- How much time there is before a transition begins
- How a transition accelerates

## Duration

To create a simple transition in CSS, we must specify two of the four aspects:

- The property that we want to transition.
- The duration of the transition.

```css
a {
  transition-property: color;
  transition-duration: 1s;
}
```

In the example above, transition-property declares which CSS property we will be animating, the text color. The second property, transition-duration, declares how long the transition will take one second.

Many properties’ state changes can be transitioned. The type of transition depends on the property you choose.

Different properties transition in different ways, for example:

- Color values, like color and background-color, will blend to a new color.
- Length values like font-size, width, and height will grow or shrink.

Duration is specified in seconds or milliseconds, such as 3s, 0.75s, 500ms. The default value is 0s, or instantaneous, as if there is no transition.

When choosing a duration, think about how long actions take in real life. For example, a human eye blink takes around 400ms. People might expect the animation of clicking a button to be as sudden as a blink.

## Delay

Our next transition property is transition-delay. Much like duration, its value is an amount of time. Delay specifies the time to wait before starting the transition. As with the duration property, the default value for transition-delay is 0s, which means no delay.

```css
a {
  transition-property: width;
  transition-duration: 750ms;
  transition-delay: 250ms;
}
```

In the example above, a change in the width of the element will start after a quarter of a second, and it will animate over three quarters of a second.

## Timing Function

The last transition property is transition-timing-function. The timing function describes the pace of the transition.

The default value is ease, which starts the transition slowly, speeds up in the middle, and slows down again at the end.

Other valid values include:

- **ease-in** — starts slow, accelerates quickly, stops abruptly
- **ease-out+** — begins abruptly, slows down, and ends slowly
- **ease-in-out** — starts slow, gets fast in the middle, and ends slowly
- **linear** — constant speed throughout

```css
a {
  transition-property: color;
  transition-duration: 1s;
  transition-timing-function: ease-out;
}
```

In the example above, the text color will be animated over one second. The timing function is ease-out which means it will begin abruptly and slow down as it ends.

## Shorthand

Now that we’ve explored each transition property, you may find yourself with many CSS rule sets that look like the code below.

```css
a {
  transition-property: color;
  transition-duration: 1.5s;
  transition-timing-function: linear;
  transition-delay: 0.5s;
}
```

Because these four properties are so frequently declared together, CSS provides a property that can be used to declare them all in one line: transition. This shorthand property describes each aspect of the transition puzzle in a single declaration. The properties must be specified in this order: transition-property, transition-duration, transition-timing-function, transition-delay.

```css
a {
  transition: color 1.5s linear 0.5s;
}
```

In the example above, we have refactored the four lines of code in the previous example into one concise line. This example will cause any change in text color to transition at constant speed over 1.5 seconds, after a delay of 0.5 seconds.

Leaving out one of the properties causes the default value for that property to be applied. There is one exception: You must set duration if you want to define delay. Since both are time values, the browser will always interpret the first time value it sees as duration.

## Combinations

The shorthand transition rule has one advantage over the set of separate transition-property rules: you can describe unique transitions for multiple properties, and combine them.

To combine transitions, add a comma (,) before the semicolon (;) in your rule. After the comma, use the same shorthand syntax. For example:

```css
a {
  transition: color 1s linear, font-size 750ms ease-in 100ms;
}
```

The above code transitions two properties at once. The text color transitions over one second with linear timing and no delay. At the same time, the font size transitions over 750 milliseconds with an ease-in timing and a 100 millisecond delay. This “chaining” is a powerful tool for expressing complicated animations.

## The Keyword All

Even with the shorthand, specifying transitions for many properties can be tedious. It is common to use the same duration, timing function, and delay for multiple properties. When this is the case you can set the transition-property value to all. This will apply the same values to all properties. To effect this, you can use all as a value for transition-property.

all means every value that changes will be transitioned in the same way. You can use all with the separate transition properties, or the shorthand syntax. This allows you to describe the transition of many properties with a single line:

```css
a {
  transition: all 1.5s linear 0.5s;
}
```

In this example, any change will be animated over one and a half seconds after a half-second delay with linear timing.
