# Javascript Runtime

Table of contents

- [Javascript Runtime](#javascript-runtime)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [The Web API Container](#the-web-api-container)
  - [The Callback Queue](#the-callback-queue)
  - [The Event Loop](#the-event-loop)

## Intro

JavaScript is a single threaded language which means that only one set of instructions can be executed at a time. Except behind the scenes we do not only have the JS Engine but also there is the JS Runtime. The runtime is the whole package including all the tools.

The browser comes with the web API which is not native to JavaScript. The web API can take care of asynchronous actions. You can access the web API by using methods on the window object.

## The Web API Container

When you run some JavaScript code in a browser, the engine starts to parse the code. Functions in the stack that are not recognized by JavaScript are sent from the parser to the Web API for it to handle.

The Web API calls that were sent to the Web API container from the Stack, like event listeners, HTTP/AJAX requests, or timing functions, sit there until an action is triggered. Either a ‘click’ happens, or the HTTP request finishes getting its data from its source, or a timer reaches its set time. In each instance, once an action is triggered, a ‘callback function’ is sent to the ‘callback queue.’

## The Callback Queue

The Callback Queue will store all the callback functions in the order in which they were added. It will ‘wait’ until the Stack is completely empty. When the Stack is empty it will send the callback function at the beginning of the queue to the Stack. Once it is back in the call stack, it is ran and then popped off the stack. When the Stack is clear again, it will send over its next callback function.

_Note - the Queue is a data structure that runs FIFO — first in first out. Whereas the Stack uses a push and pop (add to end take from end), the Queue uses push and shift (add to end take from beginning)._

## The Event Loop

The Event Loop can be thought of as a ‘thing’ inside the javascript runtime environment. Its job is to constantly look at the Stack and the Queue. If it sees the Stack is empty, it will notify the Queue to send over its next callback function. The Queue and the Stack might be empty for a period of time, but the event loop never stops checking both. At any time a callback function can be added to the Queue after an action is triggered from the Web API container.
