# Introduction

Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [console.log()](#consolelog)
  - [Single Line Comments](#single-line-comments)
  - [Multi-line Comments](#multi-line-comments)
  - [Math.random()](#mathrandom)
  - [Math.floor()](#mathfloor)
  - [Methods](#methods)
  - [Libraries](#libraries)

JavaScript is a programming language that powers the dynamic behavior on most websites. Alongside HTML and CSS, it is a core technology that makes the web run.

Not to be confused with Java, JavaScript is the language of the modern web. Along with HTML and CSS, it has become an essential web technology. If you want to get into web development, it is necessary that you learn JavaScript.

Users today expect a lot from their online experience. They want web applications that are fast, responsive and efficient. This is what JavaScript does, and for now, there’s no replacement.

You use JavasScript every day, whether you know it or not. It might be something to make your life easier, like your calendar app, or maybe it’s something to help you stay in contact with your friends like Instagram. Whether you’re sharing documents, catching up on the world by reading a digital news site, watching videos online, or any of the million things we do online daily, you’re encountering and working with JavaScript somewhere behind the scenes.

## console.log()

The console.log() method is used to log or print messages to the console. It can also be used to print objects and other info.

```javascript
// Prints: Hi there!
console.log('Hi there!');
```

## Single Line Comments

```javascript
// This line will denote a comment
```

## Multi-line Comments

```javascript
/*
The below configuration must be
changed before deployment.
*/
```

## Math.random()

The Math.random() function returns a floating-point, random number in the range from 0 (inclusive) up to but not including 1.

```javascript
console.log(Math.random());
// Prints: 0 - 0.9
```

## Math.floor()

The Math.floor() function returns the largest integer less than or equal to the given number.

```javascript
console.log(Math.floor(5.95));
// Prints: 5
```

## Methods

Methods return information about an object, and are called by appending an instance with a period ., the method name, and parentheses.

```javascript
// Returns a number between 0 and 1
Math.random();
```

## Libraries

Libraries contain methods that can be called by appending the library name with a period ., the method name, and a set of parentheses.

```javascript
Math.random();
// ☝️ Math is the library
```
