# Introduction

Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [console.log()](#consolelog)
  - [Variables](#variables)
  - [Declaring Variables](#declaring-variables)
  - [let Keyword](#let-keyword)
  - [const Keyword](#const-keyword)
  - [Numbers](#numbers)
  - [Booleans](#booleans)
  - [Strings](#strings)
  - [Null](#null)
  - [Undefined](#undefined)
  - [String .length](#string-length)
  - [String Concatenation](#string-concatenation)
  - [String Interpolation / Template Literals](#string-interpolation--template-literals)
  - [Arithmetic Operators](#arithmetic-operators)
  - [Remainder / Modulo Operator](#remainder--modulo-operator)
  - [Assignment Operators](#assignment-operators)
  - [Single Line Comments](#single-line-comments)
  - [Multi-line Comments](#multi-line-comments)
  - [Math.random()](#mathrandom)
  - [Math.floor()](#mathfloor)
  - [Methods](#methods)
  - [Libraries](#libraries)

JavaScript is a programming language that powers the dynamic behavior on most websites. Alongside HTML and CSS, it is a core technology that makes the web run.

Not to be confused with Java, JavaScript is the language of the modern web. Along with HTML and CSS, it has become an essential web technology. If you want to get into web development, it is necessary that you learn JavaScript.

Users today expect a lot from their online experience. They want web applications that are fast, responsive and efficient. This is what JavaScript does, and for now, there’s no replacement.

You use JavasScript every day, whether you know it or not. It might be something to make your life easier, like your calendar app, or maybe it’s something to help you stay in contact with your friends like Instagram. Whether you’re sharing documents, catching up on the world by reading a digital news site, watching videos online, or any of the million things we do online daily, you’re encountering and working with JavaScript somewhere behind the scenes.

## console.log()

The console.log() method is used to log or print messages to the console. It can also be used to print objects and other info.

```javascript
// Prints: Hi there!
console.log('Hi there!');
```

## Variables

Variables are used whenever there’s a need to store a piece of data. A variable contains data that can be used in the program elsewhere. Using variables also ensures code re-usability since it can be used to replace the same value in multiple places.

A variable is a container for data that is stored in computer memory. It is referenced by a descriptive name that a programmer can call to assign a specific value and retrieve it.

```javascript
const currency = '$';
let userIncome = 85000;

console.log(currency + userIncome + ' is more than the average income.');
// Prints: $85000 is more than the average income.
```

## Declaring Variables

To declare a variable in JavaScript, any of these three keywords can be used along with a variable name:

var is used in pre-ES6 versions of JavaScript.
let is the preferred way to declare a variable when it can be reassigned.
const is the preferred way to declare a variable with a constant value.

```javascript
var age;
let weight;
const numberOfFingers = 20;
```

## let Keyword

let creates a local variable in JavaScript & can be re-assigned. Initialization during the declaration of a let variable is optional. A let variable will contain undefined if nothing is assigned to it.

```javascript
let count;
console.log(count); // Prints: undefined
count = 10;
console.log(count); // Prints: 10
```

## const Keyword

A constant variable can be declared using the keyword const. It must have an assignment. Any attempt of re-assigning a const variable will result in JavaScript runtime error.

```javascript
const numberOfColumns = 4;
numberOfColumns = 8;
// TypeError: Assignment to constant variable.
```

## Numbers

Numbers are a primitive data type. They include the set of all integers and floating point numbers.

```javascript
let amount = 6;
let price = 4.99;
```

## Booleans

Booleans are a primitive data type. They can be either true or false.

```javascript
let lateToWork = true;
```

## Strings

Strings are a primitive data type. They are any grouping of characters (letters, spaces, numbers, or symbols) surrounded by single quotes ' or double quotes ".

```javascript
let single = 'Wheres my bandit hat?';
let double = "Wheres my bandit hat?";
```

## Null

Null is a primitive data type. It represents the intentional absence of value. In code, it is represented as null.

```javascript
let x = null;
```

## Undefined

undefined is a primitive JavaScript value that represents lack of defined value. Variables that are declared but not initialized to a value will have the value undefined.

```javascript
var a;

console.log(a);
// Prints: undefined
```

## String .length

The .length property of a string returns the number of characters that make up the string.

```javascript
let message = 'good nite';
console.log(message.length);
// Prints: 9

console.log('howdy'.length);
// Prints: 5
```

## String Concatenation

In JavaScript, multiple strings can be concatenated together using the + operator. In the example, multiple strings and variables containing string values have been concatenated. After execution of the code block, the displayText variable will contain the concatenated string.

```javascript
let service = 'credit card';
let month = 'May 30th';
let displayText = 'Your ' + service + ' bill is due on ' + month + '.';

console.log(displayText);
// Prints: Your credit card bill is due on May 30th.
```

## String Interpolation / Template Literals

String interpolation is the process of evaluating string literals containing one or more placeholders (expressions, variables, etc).

It can be performed using template literals: text ${expression} text.

```javascript
let age = 7;

// String concatenation
'Tommy is ' + age + ' years old.';

// String interpolation
`Tommy is ${age} years old.`;
```

## Arithmetic Operators

JavaScript supports arithmetic operators for:

- ( + ) addition
- ( - ) subtraction
- ( \* ) multiplication
- ( / ) division
- ( % ) modulo

```javascript
// Addition
5 + 5;
// Subtraction
10 - 5;
// Multiplication
5 * 10;
// Division
10 / 5;
// Modulo
10 % 5;
```

## Remainder / Modulo Operator

The remainder operator, sometimes called modulo, returns the number that remains after the right-hand number divides into the left-hand number as many times as it evenly can.

```javascript
// calculates # of weeks in a year, rounds down to nearest integer
const weeksInYear = Math.floor(365 / 7);

// calcuates the number of days left over after 365 is divded by 7
const daysLeftOver = 367 % 7;

console.log('A year has ' + weeksInYear + 'weeks and ' + daysLeftOver + 'days');
```

## Assignment Operators

An assignment operator assigns a value to its left operand based on the value of its right operand. Here are some of them:

- += addition assignment
- -= subtraction assignment
- \*= multiplication assignment
- /= division assignment

```javascript
let number = 100;

// Both statements will add 10
number = number + 10;
number += 10;

console.log(number);
// Prints: 120
```

## Single Line Comments

```javascript
// This line will denote a comment
```

## Multi-line Comments

```javascript
/*
The below configuration must be
changed before deployment.
*/
```

## Math.random()

The Math.random() function returns a floating-point, random number in the range from 0 (inclusive) up to but not including 1.

```javascript
console.log(Math.random());
// Prints: 0 - 0.9
```

## Math.floor()

The Math.floor() function returns the largest integer less than or equal to the given number.

```javascript
console.log(Math.floor(5.95));
// Prints: 5
```

## Methods

Methods return information about an object, and are called by appending an instance with a period ., the method name, and parentheses.

```javascript
// Returns a number between 0 and 1
Math.random();
```

## Libraries

Libraries contain methods that can be called by appending the library name with a period ., the method name, and a set of parentheses.

```javascript
Math.random();
// ☝️ Math is the library
```
