# Variables

Table of Contents

- [Variables](#variables)
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
    - [Declaring Variables and Constants](#declaring-variables-and-constants)
      - [let Keyword](#let-keyword)
      - [const Keyword](#const-keyword)
    - [Rules for Naming Variables and Constants](#rules-for-naming-variables-and-constants)
    - [Two types of data](#two-types-of-data)
      - [Primitive Data Types](#primitive-data-types)
      - [Composite Data Types](#composite-data-types)
    - [Strings](#strings)
      - [The length Property](#the-length-property)
      - [String Concatenation](#string-concatenation)
      - [Escape Sequences](#escape-sequences)
      - [String Interpolation / Template Literals](#string-interpolation--template-literals)
    - [Numbers](#numbers)
    - [Booleans](#booleans)
    - [Null](#null)
    - [Undefined](#undefined)
  - [Pass By Value vs. Pass By Reference](#pass-by-value-vs-pass-by-reference)
  - [Type Coercion](#type-coercion)
    - [Implicit vs. Explicit Coercion](#implicit-vs-explicit-coercion)
      - [Three Types of Conversion](#three-types-of-conversion)
  - [Typeof Operator](#typeof-operator)

## Introduction

Defining data and then manipulating that data is the basis of programming.

In JavaScript, we store this data inside variables. Essentially, variables are just containers which hold reusable data.

Variables are used whenever there’s a need to store a piece of data. A variable contains data that can be used in the program elsewhere. Using variables also ensures code re-usability since it can be used to replace the same value in multiple places.

```javascript
const currency = '$';
let userIncome = 85000;

console.log(currency + userIncome + ' is more than the average income.');
// Prints: $85000 is more than the average income.
```

### Declaring Variables and Constants

To declare a variable in JavaScript, any of th three following keywords can be used along with a variable name:

The **var** keyword is used in pre-ES6 versions of JavaScript. The **let** keyword is the preferred way to declare a variable when it can be reassigned. The **const** keyword is the preferred way to declare a variable with a constant value. In JavaScript today, it is considered best practice to avoid using **var**.

```javascript
var age;
let weight;
const numberOfFingers = 20;
```

#### let Keyword

let creates a local variable in JavaScript & can be re-assigned. Initialization during the declaration of a let variable is optional. A let variable will contain undefined if nothing is assigned to it.

```javascript
let count;
console.log(count); // Prints: undefined
count = 10;
console.log(count); // Prints: 10
```

#### const Keyword

A constant variable can be declared using the keyword const. It must have an assignment. Any attempt of re-assigning a const variable will result in JavaScript runtime error.

```javascript
const numberOfColumns = 4;
numberOfColumns = 8;
// TypeError: Assignment to constant variable.
```

### Rules for Naming Variables and Constants

- Variable names are case-sensitive.
- Variable names should begin with a lowercase character.
- Variable names cannot begin with a number.
- Variable names cannot contain symbols.
- camelCased variable names are best practice.

### Two types of data

#### Primitive Data Types

- **String:** a series of characters (letters, numbers, spaces, symbols, etc.) wrapped in quotes
- **Number:** integers, floats, etc
- **Boolean:** true or false
- **Null:** intentionaly having no value
- **Undefined:** a declared variable that hasn't been assigned a value yet
- **Symbol:** a unique value that's not equal to any other value. Note, this is an ES6 feature that never really took off, so don't worry about it for now.

One key thing to know about primitive data types is that they are immutable which means they can't be altered.

#### Composite Data Types

- **Object:** Objects in JavaScript, just as in many other programming languages, can be compared to objects in real life. Objects are standalone entities, with properties stored in key/value pairs. Compare it with a person, for example. A person is an object, with properties. A person has a race, a date of birth, a weight, a height, an eye color, etc. The same way, JavaScript objects can have properties, which define their characteristics.

Take note of the fact that Objects can contain an assortment of different data types all stored inside one variable! This is what makes them Composite data types by definition.

### Strings

Strings are a primitive data type. They are any grouping of characters (letters, spaces, numbers, or symbols) surrounded by single quotes ' or double quotes ". Strings are also immutable, which means that individual characters cannot be altered.

#### The length Property

The .length property of a string returns the number of characters that make up the string.

```javascript
let message = 'good nite';
console.log(message.length);
// Prints: 9

console.log('howdy'.length);
// Prints: 5
```

#### String Concatenation

In JavaScript, multiple strings can be concatenated together using the + operator. In the example, multiple strings and variables containing string values have been concatenated. After execution of the code block, the displayText variable will contain the concatenated string.

```javascript
let service = 'credit card';
let month = 'May 30th';
let displayText = 'Your ' + service + ' bill is due on ' + month + '.';

console.log(displayText);
// Prints: Your credit card bill is due on May 30th.
```

#### Escape Sequences

What if you wanted to put a contraction inside of a string? For example, take a look at the folowing code block.

```javascript
const myString = 'Why doesn't this work';
// => SyntaxError: Unexpected identifier
```

Take a look at this example:

```javascript
const myString = "Why doesn't this work";
console.log(myString); // => 'Why doesn't this work?'
```

Notice how when we put the (\) in front of the (') it didn't end our string? This is called escaping the character. Anytime JavaScript sees a (\) inside of a string, it knows that the following character has a special meaning. Here is a list of some of the most common escape sequences:

- \' => single quote
- \" => double quote
- \\ => backslash
- \n => newline
- \r => carriage return
- \t => tab
- \b => backspace
- \f => form feed

Notice that even a backslash itself has to be escaped in order to display inside a string as well. Now let's see what you can do!

#### String Interpolation / Template Literals

String interpolation is the process of evaluating string literals containing one or more placeholders (expressions, variables, etc).

It can be performed using template literals: text ${expression} text. Inside a template literal, you're able to refer to variables or execute code by using ${}.

String interpolation also removes the need for escaped characters and string concatenation in many case as well. If you hit return, tab, etc inside of a template it will format the string in that form for you!

```javascript
let age = 7;

// String concatenation
'Tommy is ' + age + ' years old.';

// String interpolation
`Tommy is ${age} years old.`;
```

### Numbers

Numbers are a primitive data type. They include the set of all integers and floating point numbers.

```javascript
let amount = 6;
let price = 4.99;
```

### Booleans

Booleans are a primitive data type. They can be either true or false.

```javascript
let lateToWork = true;
```

### Null

Null is a primitive data type. It represents the intentional absence of value. In code, it is represented as null.

```javascript
let x = null;
```

### Undefined

undefined is a primitive JavaScript value that represents lack of defined value. Variables that are declared but not initialized to a value will have the value undefined.

```javascript
var a;

console.log(a);
// Prints: undefined
```

## Pass By Value vs. Pass By Reference

Primitive Data Types:

- Primitive values are defined by being immutable, they cannot be altered. The variable assigned to a primitive type may be reassigned to a new value, but the original value can not be changed in the same way objects can be modified. Primitives are passed by value, meaning their values are copied and then placed somewhere else in the memory. They are also compared by value.

Composite Data Types:

- The only type that leaves us with is objects. Objects are able to be mutated and their properties are passed by reference, meaning their properties are not stored separately in memory. A new variable pointing to an object will not create a copy, but reference the original objects location in memory. Therefore, changing the 2nd object will also change the first.

## Type Coercion

Type coercion is the process of converting value from one type to another (such as string to number or object to boolean). Any type, be it primitive or an object, is a valid subject for type coercion.

````javascript
console.log(10 + 5); // 15
console.log('10' + 5); // 105
```Make a calculator
5 + "34" // "534"
5 - "4" // 1
10 % 5 // 0
5 % 10 // 5
"Java" + "Script" // "JavaScript"
" " + " " //  "  "
" " + 0 //  " 0"
true + true // 2
true + false // 1
false + true //  1
false - true //  -1
3 - 4 //  -1
"Bob" - "bill" // NAN


5 >= 1 // true
0 === 1 //  false
4 <= 1 //  false
1 != 1 //  false
"A" > "B" //  false
"B" < "C" //  true
"a" > "A" //  true
"b" < "A" //  false
true === false //  false
true != true // false



What happened? We can't add a string value and a number value together; instead, JavaScript "coerces" (changes) the number into a string and treats the + operator as an instruction to concatenate strings.

### Implicit vs. Explicit Coercion

Type coercion can be explicit and implicit.

When a developer expresses the intention to convert between types by writing the appropriate code, like Number(value), it’s called **explicit type coercion** (or type casting).

Since JavaScript is a weakly-typed language, values can also be converted between different types automatically, and it is called **implicit type coercion.** It usually happens when you apply operators to values of different types, like 1 == null or 2 / ’5'. It can even be triggered by the surrounding context, like with if (value) {…}, where value is coerced to boolean.

#### Three Types of Conversion

There are only three types of conversion in JavaScript:

- to string
- to boolean
- to number

##
## Typeof Operator

Quite often in programming, we need to be able to look up what the specific data type of a given operand is. In JavaScript, the typeof operator returns the data type of its operand in the form of a string. Operand can be any object, function or variable.

- typeof("testing") => "string"
- typeof(22) => "number"
- typeof(false) => "boolean"

Keep in mind that the typeof an array is an object.
````
