# Variables

Table of Contents

- [Variables](#variables)
  - [Declaring Variables](#declaring-variables)
  - [let Keyword](#let-keyword)
  - [const Keyword](#const-keyword)
  - [Numbers](#numbers)
  - [Booleans](#booleans)
  - [Strings](#strings)
  - [Null](#null)
  - [Undefined](#undefined)
  - [String .length](#string-length)
  - [String Concatenation](#string-concatenation)
  - [String Interpolation / Template Literals](#string-interpolation--template-literals)
  - [Arithmetic Operators](#arithmetic-operators)
  - [Remainder / Modulo Operator](#remainder--modulo-operator)
  - [Assignment Operators](#assignment-operators)

Defining data and then manipulating that data is the basis of programming.

In JavaScript, we store this data inside variables. Essentially, variables are just containers which hold reusable data.

Variables are used whenever there’s a need to store a piece of data. A variable contains data that can be used in the program elsewhere. Using variables also ensures code re-usability since it can be used to replace the same value in multiple places.

```javascript
const currency = '$';
let userIncome = 85000;

console.log(currency + userIncome + ' is more than the average income.');
// Prints: $85000 is more than the average income.
```

## Declaring Variables

To declare a variable in JavaScript, any of these three keywords can be used along with a variable name:

var is used in pre-ES6 versions of JavaScript.
let is the preferred way to declare a variable when it can be reassigned.
const is the preferred way to declare a variable with a constant value.

```javascript
var age;
let weight;
const numberOfFingers = 20;
```

## let Keyword

let creates a local variable in JavaScript & can be re-assigned. Initialization during the declaration of a let variable is optional. A let variable will contain undefined if nothing is assigned to it.

```javascript
let count;
console.log(count); // Prints: undefined
count = 10;
console.log(count); // Prints: 10
```

## const Keyword

A constant variable can be declared using the keyword const. It must have an assignment. Any attempt of re-assigning a const variable will result in JavaScript runtime error.

```javascript
const numberOfColumns = 4;
numberOfColumns = 8;
// TypeError: Assignment to constant variable.
```

## Numbers

Numbers are a primitive data type. They include the set of all integers and floating point numbers.

```javascript
let amount = 6;
let price = 4.99;
```

## Booleans

Booleans are a primitive data type. They can be either true or false.

```javascript
let lateToWork = true;
```

## Strings

Strings are a primitive data type. They are any grouping of characters (letters, spaces, numbers, or symbols) surrounded by single quotes ' or double quotes ".

```javascript
let single = 'Wheres my bandit hat?';
let double = 'Wheres my bandit hat?';
```

## Null

Null is a primitive data type. It represents the intentional absence of value. In code, it is represented as null.

```javascript
let x = null;
```

## Undefined

undefined is a primitive JavaScript value that represents lack of defined value. Variables that are declared but not initialized to a value will have the value undefined.

```javascript
var a;

console.log(a);
// Prints: undefined
```

## String .length

The .length property of a string returns the number of characters that make up the string.

```javascript
let message = 'good nite';
console.log(message.length);
// Prints: 9

console.log('howdy'.length);
// Prints: 5
```

## String Concatenation

In JavaScript, multiple strings can be concatenated together using the + operator. In the example, multiple strings and variables containing string values have been concatenated. After execution of the code block, the displayText variable will contain the concatenated string.

```javascript
let service = 'credit card';
let month = 'May 30th';
let displayText = 'Your ' + service + ' bill is due on ' + month + '.';

console.log(displayText);
// Prints: Your credit card bill is due on May 30th.
```

## String Interpolation / Template Literals

String interpolation is the process of evaluating string literals containing one or more placeholders (expressions, variables, etc).

It can be performed using template literals: text ${expression} text.

```javascript
let age = 7;

// String concatenation
'Tommy is ' + age + ' years old.';

// String interpolation
`Tommy is ${age} years old.`;
```

## Arithmetic Operators

JavaScript supports arithmetic operators for:

- ( + ) addition
- ( - ) subtraction
- ( \* ) multiplication
- ( / ) division
- ( % ) modulo

```javascript
// Addition
5 + 5;
// Subtraction
10 - 5;
// Multiplication
5 * 10;
// Division
10 / 5;
// Modulo
10 % 5;
```

## Remainder / Modulo Operator

The remainder operator, sometimes called modulo, returns the number that remains after the right-hand number divides into the left-hand number as many times as it evenly can.

```javascript
// calculates # of weeks in a year, rounds down to nearest integer
const weeksInYear = Math.floor(365 / 7);

// calcuates the number of days left over after 365 is divded by 7
const daysLeftOver = 367 % 7;

console.log('A year has ' + weeksInYear + 'weeks and ' + daysLeftOver + 'days');
```

## Assignment Operators

An assignment operator assigns a value to its left operand based on the value of its right operand. Here are some of them:

- += addition assignment
- -= subtraction assignment
- \*= multiplication assignment
- /= division assignment

```javascript
let number = 100;

// Both statements will add 10
number = number + 10;
number += 10;

console.log(number);
// Prints: 120
```
