# Conditionals

Table of Contents

- [Conditionals](#conditionals)
  - [Control Flow](#control-flow)
  - [Arithmetic Operators](#arithmetic-operators)
  - [Remainder / Modulo Operator](#remainder--modulo-operator)
  - [Assignment Operators](#assignment-operators)
  - [Logical Operator &&](#logical-operator-)
  - [Logical Operator ||](#logical-operator--1)
  - [Logical Operator !](#logical-operator--2)
  - [Ternary Operator](#ternary-operator)
  - [Truthy and Falsy](#truthy-and-falsy)
  - [Comparison Operators](#comparison-operators)
  - [if Statement](#if-statement)
  - [else Statement](#else-statement)
  - [else if Clause](#else-if-clause)
  - [switch Statement](#switch-statement)

## Control Flow

Control flow is the order in which statements are executed in a program. The default control flow is for statements to be read and executed in order from left-to-right, top-to-bottom in a program file.

Control structures such as conditionals (if statements and the like) alter control flow by only executing blocks of code if certain conditions are met. These structures essentially allow a program to make decisions about which code is executed as the program runs.

## Arithmetic Operators

JavaScript supports arithmetic operators for:

- ( + ) addition
- ( - ) subtraction
- ( \* ) multiplication
- ( / ) division
- ( \*\* ) exponent
- ( % ) modulo

```javascript
// Addition
5 + 5;
// Subtraction
10 - 5;
// Multiplication
5 * 10;
// Division
10 / 5;
//Exponent
5 ** 2;
// Modulo
10 % 5;
```

## Remainder / Modulo Operator

The remainder operator, sometimes called modulo, returns the number that remains after the right-hand number divides into the left-hand number as many times as it evenly can.

```javascript
// calculates # of weeks in a year, rounds down to nearest integer
const weeksInYear = Math.floor(365 / 7);

// calcuates the number of days left over after 365 is divded by 7
const daysLeftOver = 367 % 7;

console.log('A year has ' + weeksInYear + 'weeks and ' + daysLeftOver + 'days');
```

## Assignment Operators

An assignment operator assigns a value to its left operand based on the value of its right operand. Here are some of them:

- += addition assignment
- -= subtraction assignment
- \*= multiplication assignment
- /= division assignment

```javascript
let number = 100;

// Both statements will add 10
number = number + 10;
number += 10;

console.log(number);
// Prints: 120
```

## Logical Operator &&

The logical AND operator && checks two values and returns a boolean. If both values are truthy, then it returns true. If one, or both, of the values is falsy, then it returns false.

| A     |   B   | A and B |
| :---- | :---: | ------: |
| false | false |   false |
| false | true  |   false |
| true  | false |   false |
| true  | true  |    true |

```javascript
true && true; // true
1 > 2 && 2 > 1; // false
true && false; // false
4 === 4 && 3 > 1; // true
```

## Logical Operator ||

The logical OR operator || checks two values and returns a boolean. If one or both values are truthy, it returns true. If both values are falsy, it returns false.

| A     |   B   | A or B |
| :---- | :---: | -----: |
| false | false |  false |
| false | true  |   true |
| true  | false |   true |
| true  | true  |   true |

```javascript
true || false; // true
10 > 5 || 10 > 20; // true
false || false; // false
10 > 100 || 10 > 20; // false
```

## Logical Operator !

The logical NOT operator ! can be used to do one of the following:

Invert a Boolean value.
Invert the truthiness of non-Boolean values.

```javascript
let lateToWork = true;
let oppositeValue = !lateToWork;

console.log(oppositeValue);
// Prints: false
```

## Ternary Operator

The ternary operator allows for a compact syntax in the case of binary (choosing between two choices) decisions. It accepts a condition followed by a ? operator, and then two expressions separated by a :. If the condition evaluates to truthy, the first expression is executed, otherwise, the second expression is executed.

```javascript
let price = 10.5;
let day = 'Monday';

day === 'Monday' ? (price -= 1.5) : (price += 1.5);
```

## Truthy and Falsy

In JavaScript, values evaluate to true or false when evaluated as Booleans.

Values that evaluate to true are known as truthy
Values that evaluate to false are known as falsy
Falsy values include false, 0, empty strings, null undefined, and NaN. All other values are truthy.

## Comparison Operators

Comparison operators are used to comparing two values and return true or false depending on the validity of the comparison:

- ( == ) loosely equal
- ( === ) strict equal
- ( != ) loosely no equal
- ( !== ) strict not equal
- ( > ) greater than
- ( >= ) greater than or equal
- ( < ) less than
- ( <= ) less than or equal

This ( == ) operator is used to compare if two values have the same value, even if they aren't necessarily the same type. For two values to be strictly equal (===) to each other, they need to not only have the same value, but also must have the same data type.

```javascript
const isMailSent = true;

if (isMailSent) {
  console.log('Mail sent to recipient');
}
```

## if Statement

An if statement accepts an expression with a set of parentheses:

If the expression evaluates to a truthy value, then the code within its code body executes.
If the expression evaluates to a falsy value, its code body will not execute.

```javascript
const isMailSent = true;

if (isMailSent) {
  console.log('Mail sent to recipient');
}
```

## else Statement

An else block can be added to an if block or series of if-else if blocks. The else block will be executed only if the if condition fails.

```javascript
const isTaskCompleted = false;

if (isTaskCompleted) {
  console.log('Task completed');
} else {
  console.log('Task incomplete');
}
```

## else if Clause

After an initial if block, else if blocks can each check an additional condition. An optional else block can be added after the else if block(s) to run by default if none of the conditionals evaluated to truthy.

```javascript
const size = 10;

if (size > 100) {
  console.log('Big');
} else if (size > 20) {
  console.log('Medium');
} else if (size > 4) {
  console.log('Small');
} else {
  console.log('Tiny');
}
// Print: Small
```

## switch Statement

The switch statements provide a means of checking an expression against multiple case clauses. If a case matches, the code inside that clause is executed.

The case clause should finish with a break keyword. If no case matches but a default clause is included, the code inside default will be executed.

Note: If break is omitted from the block of a case, the switch statement will continue to check against case values until a break is encountered or the flow is broken.

```javascript
const food = 'salad';

switch (food) {
  case 'oyster':
    console.log('The taste of the sea 🦪');
    break;
  case 'pizza':
    console.log('A delicious pie 🍕');
    break;
  default:
    console.log('Enjoy your meal');
}

// Prints: Enjoy your meal
```
