# Arrays

Table of Contents

- [Arrays](#arrays)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [Index](#index)
  - [Property .length](#property-length)
  - [Mutable](#mutable)
  - [Built-in Methods](#built-in-methods)
    - [Array .push()](#array-push)
    - [Array .pop()](#array-pop)
    - [Array .map()](#array-map)
    - [Array .find()](#array-find)
    - [Array .filter()](#array-filter)
    - [Array .reduce()](#array-reduce)
    - [Array .forEach()](#array-foreach)

## Intro

Arrays are lists of ordered, stored data. They can hold items that are of any data type. Arrays are created by using square brackets, with individual elements separated by commas.

```javascript
// An array containing numbers
const numberArray = [0, 1, 2, 3];

// An array containing different data types
const mixedArray = [1, 'chicken', false];
```

## Index

Array elements are arranged by index values, starting at 0 as the first element index. Elements can be accessed by their index using the array name, and the index surrounded by square brackets.

```javascript
// Accessing an array element
const myArray = [100, 200, 300];

console.log(myArray[0]); // 100
console.log(myArray[1]); // 200
console.log(myArray[2]); // 300
```

## Property .length

The .length property of a JavaScript array indicates the number of elements the array contains.

```javascript
const numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4];

numbers.length; // 4
```

## Mutable

JavaScript arrays are mutable, meaning that the values they contain can be changed.

Even if they are declared using const, the contents can be manipulated by reassigning internal values or using methods like .push() and .pop().

```javascript
const names = ['Alice', 'Bob'];

names.push('Carl');
// ['Alice', 'Bob', 'Carl']
```

## Built-in Methods

### Array .push()

The .push() method of JavaScript arrays can be used to add one or more elements to the end of an array. .push() mutates the original array returns the new length of the array.

```javascript
// Adding a single element:
const cart = ['apple', 'orange'];
cart.push('pear');

// Adding multiple elements:
const numbers = [1, 2];
numbers.push(3, 4, 5);
```

### Array .pop()

The .pop() method removes the last element from an array and returns that element.

```javascript
const ingredients = ['eggs', 'flour', 'chocolate'];

const poppedIngredient = ingredients.pop(); // 'chocolate'
console.log(ingredients); // ['eggs', 'flour']
```

### Array .map()

The .map() method executes a callback function on each element in an array. It returns a new array made up of the return values from the callback function.

The original array does not get altered, and the returned array may contain different elements than the original array.

```javascript
const finalParticipants = ['Taylor', 'Donald', 'Don', 'Natasha', 'Bobby'];

const announcements = finalParticipants.map((member) => {
  return member + ' joined the contest.';
});

console.log(announcements);
```

### Array .find()

```javascript

```

### Array .filter()

The .filter() method executes a callback function on each element in an array. The callback function for each of the elements must return either true or false. The returned array is a new array with any elements for which the callback function returns true.

Here, the array filteredArray will contain all the elements of randomNumbers but 4.

```javascript
const randomNumbers = [4, 11, 42, 14, 39];
const filteredArray = randomNumbers.filter((n) => {
  return n > 5;
});
```

### Array .reduce()

The .reduce() method iterates through an array and returns a single value.

It takes a callback function with two parameters (accumulator, currentValue) as arguments. On each iteration, accumulator is the value returned by the last iteration, and the currentValue is the current element. Optionally, a second argument can be passed which acts as the initial value of the accumulator.

Here, the .reduce() method will sum all the elements of the array.

```javascript
const arrayOfNumbers = [1, 2, 3, 4];

const sum = arrayOfNumbers.reduce((accumulator, currentValue) => {
  return accumulator + currentValue;
});

console.log(sum); // 10
```

### Array .forEach()

The .forEach() method executes a callback function on each of the elements in an array in order.

Here, the callback function containing a console.log() method will be executed 5 times, once for each element.

```javascript
const numbers = [28, 77, 45, 99, 27];

numbers.forEach((number) => {
  console.log(number);
});
```
