# JIT Compiler

Table of contents

- [JIT Compiler](#jit-compiler)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [The Combo](#the-combo)
  - [The V8 Engine](#the-v8-engine)
    - [The Parser](#the-parser)
    - [The AST](#the-ast)
    - [The Interpreter](#the-interpreter)
    - [The Compiler](#the-compiler)
      - [Babel and TypeScript](#babel-and-typescript)

## Intro

A JavaScript engine can run code either with an interpreter or a compiler. Interpreters are quicker to get up and running the code but they don't optimize it. The code generated from a compiler will run eventually faster but will take longer to start executing.

## The Combo

In modern engines, the interpreter starts reading the code line by line while the profiler watches for frequently used code and then passes it to the compiler to be optimized. In the end, the JavaScript engine takes the bytecode the interpreter outputs and mixes in the optimized code the compiler outputs and then gives that to the computer. This is called "Just in Time" or JIT Compiler.

## The V8 Engine

### The Parser

Parsing is the process of analyzing the source code, checking it for errors, and breaking it up into parts.

### The AST

The parser produces a data structure called the Abstract Syntax Tree or AST. AST is a tree graph of the source code that does not show every detail of the original syntax, but contains structural or content-related details. Certain things are implicit in the tree and do not need to be shown, hence the title abstract.

### The Interpreter

An interpreter directly executes each line of code line by line, without requiring them to be compiled into a machine language program. Interpreters can use different strategies to increase performance. They can parse the source code and execute it immediately, translate it into more efficient machine code, execute precompiled code made by a compiler, or some combination of these. In the V8 engine, the interpreter outputs bytecode.

### The Compiler

The compiler works ahead of time to convert instructions into a machine-code or lower-level form so that they can be read and executed by a computer. It runs all of the code and tries to figure out what the code does and then compiles it down into another language that is easier for the computer to read.

#### Babel and TypeScript

Babel is a Javascript compiler that takes your modern JS code and returns browser compatible JS (older JS code). Typescript is a superset of Javascript that compiles down to Javascript. Both of these do exactly what compilers do. Take one language and convert into a different one!
