# useState Hook

- [useState Hook](#usestate-hook)
  - [0. Resources](#0-resources)
  - [1. Theory](#1-theory)
  - [2. Declaring state in React](#2-declaring-state-in-react)

## 0. Resources

- [useState in React: A complete guide](https://blog.logrocket.com/a-guide-to-usestate-in-react-ecb9952e406c/)
- [React Reference Guide: Hooks API](https://blog.logrocket.com/react-reference-guide-hooks-api/)

## 1. Theory

React Hooks are functions that add state variables to functional components and instrument the lifecycle methods of classes. They tend to start with use.

`useState` is a Hook that allows you to have state variables in functional components. You pass the initial state to this function and it returns a variable with the current state value (not necessarily the initial state) and another function to update this value.

Calling `React.useState` inside a function component generates a single piece of state associated with that component.

Whereas the state in a class is always an object, with Hooks, the state can be any type. Each piece of state holds a single value, which can be an object, an array, a boolean, or any other type you can imagine.

So when should you use the useState Hook? It’s especially useful for local component state, but larger projects might require additional state management solutions.

## 2. Declaring state in React

`useState` is a named export from `react`. To use it, you can write:

```javascript
React.useState
```
Or to import it just write useState:

```javascript
import React, { useState } from 'react';
```

But unlike the state object that you can declare in a class, which allows you to declare more than one state variable, like this:

```javascript
import React from 'react';

class Message extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);
    this.state = {
      message: '',
      list: [],
    };
  }
  /* ... */
}
```

The `useState` Hook allows you to declare only one state variable (of any type) at a time, like this

```javascript
import React, { useState } from 'react';

const Message= () => {
   const messageState = useState( '' );
   const listState = useState( [] );
}
```

`useState` takes the initial value of the state variable as an argument.

You can pass it directly, as shown in the previous example, or use a function to lazily initialize the variable (useful when the initial state is the result of an expensive computation):

```javascript
const Message= () => {
   const messageState = useState( () => expensiveComputation() );
   /* ... */
}
```
```javascript

```
```javascript

```
```javascript

```
