# Prototypical Inheritance

Table of Contents

- [Prototypical Inheritance](#prototypical-inheritance)
- [Intro](#intro)
  - [Classical vs Prototypal Inheritance](#classical-vs-prototypal-inheritance)
  - [Objects](#objects)
  - [Function Constructors](#function-constructors)
  - [Inheritance with the Prototype Chain](#inheritance-with-the-prototype-chain)
  - [Prototype vs `__proto__`](#prototype-vs-__proto__)

# Intro

In programming, we often want to take something and extend it.

For instance, we have a user object with its properties and methods, and want to make admin and guest as slightly modified variants of it. We’d like to reuse what we have in user, not copy/reimplement its methods, just build a new object on top of it.

Prototypal inheritance is a language feature that helps in that.

## Classical vs Prototypal Inheritance

JavaScript is a very unique, beautiful, sometimes weird, and incredibly powerful programming language. Object-oriented JavaScript uses prototypal inheritance. Here we find JavaScript making popular a concept that is in many ways better than what is already in use in other programming languages like Java, C#, and C++ (Classical inheritance).

The classical inheritance or class bases inheritance involves writing classes; these are like blueprints of objects to be created. Classes can inherit from classes and even create subclasses. This method is solid and battle-tested as it is what powers many popular programming languages like Java and C++ as mentioned above but it has its downside.

One of the downsides of classical inheritance is that it is very verbose and you can quickly end up with a huge mass of collection and trees of objects that interact, that it can become very hard to figure out what is going on even if you use good practice. Plus you would have to learn and use a lot of intimidating keywords viz: friend, protected, private, interface, etc.

**_The class keyword, however, has been introduced to JavaScript in ES2015, but it is just syntactical sugar, JavaScript remains prototype-based._**

Prototypal inheritance is a much simpler approach. It is flexible, extensible, and very easy to understand. It is not a silver bullet anyway but it is in many ways better than class-based inheritance and it would be our focus going forward.

## Objects

When it comes to inheritance, JavaScript only has one construct: objects. Each object has a private property (`__proto__`) which holds a link to another object called its prototype. That prototype object has a prototype of its own, and so on until an object is reached with null as its prototype. By definition, null has no prototype, and acts as the final link in this prototype chain.

Nearly all objects in JavaScript are instances of **Object** which sits on the top of a prototype chain.

## Function Constructors

Functions are objects in JavaScript, which is not true for other languages. Because of that, they can be called multiple ways, but they can also be constructors. A function constructor creates a new object and returns it. Every JavaScript function, is actually a function object itself.

Almost everything in JavaScript can be created with a constructor. Even basic JavaScript types like numbers and strings can be created using a constructor.

Examples of function constructors in JavaScript:

```javascript
// Notice the Difference than using regular assignment:

const five = new Number(5);
const assignFive = 5;

const newString = new String(`I am a new string`);
const assignString = `I am an assigned string`;

typeof five; // object
typeof assignFive; // number
typeof newString; //object
typeof assignString; // string

five === assignFive; // false
five == assignFive; // true, types are coerced
```

Notice how the types are different depending on how they are created.
Arrays, Booleans, Dates, Objects, and Strings can be created this way as well.

**When we assign a variable, JavaScript is going to run internally the function constructor, so that we have access to methods living in the prototype. It sees that you want to use object methods, so it automatically assumes you meant object istead of a primitive type. So technically, every type in JavaScript is an object and has a function constructor for it, with the exception of null and undefined.**

## Inheritance with the Prototype Chain

JavaScript objects are dynamic "bags" of properties. JavaScript objects have a link to a prototype object. When trying to access a property of an object, the property will not only be sought on the object but on the prototype of the object, the prototype of the prototype, and so on until either a property with a matching name is found or the end of the prototype chain is reached.

All JavaScript objects inherit properties and methods from a prototype:

- Date objects inherit from Date.prototype.
- Array objects inherit from Array.prototype.
- Function objects inherit from Function.prototype.

The Object.prototype is on top of the prototype inheritance chain. ​ Date objects, Array objects, and Function objects all inherit from Object.prototype.

Almost all objects in Javascript pass down properties through a prototype chain. We call this chain, prototypal inheritance. The child of the object "inherits" properties from its parent. All objects in JavaScript are descended from the Object constructor unless deliberately created or altered to not do so. The objects inherit methods and properties from Object.prototype. The prototype property also has an accessor property called `__proto__` that creates a link between the current object and points to the object it was created from, the "prototype".

```javascript
Object.prototype.__proto__;
// null

Object.prototype;
{
  __proto__: null;
  // ...more methods and properties
}

Object;
// function Object()
// This is the object constructor function

Object.prototype.constructor;
// function Object()
// Points to the constructor

Object.__proto__;
// function () {...}
// Because it is created with a constructor function
```

## Prototype vs `__proto__`

Understanding the difference between `__proto__` and prototype can be quite a confusing concept for JavaScript developers. Every function in JavaScript automatically gets a prototype property when it is created that gives it the call, apply, and bind methods. It doesn't really do anything with regular functions, but in constructor functions the prototype property allows us to add our own methods to the objects we create. The `__proto__` property is what creates the link between prototype objects, the child inherits properties from the parent through the prototype chain. Each time a new object is created in JavaScript, it uses the `__proto__` getter function to use a built in constructor function based on what is being created. This could be an Array, Boolean, Date, Number, Object, String, Function, or RegExp. Each one has their own separate properties and methods that they inherit from the constructor.

```javascript
let newArr = new Array

 newArr // []

    {
  /*all array properties and methods inherited from Array constructor function.*/

      length: 0
      prototype: {
        concat, forEach, pop, splice...
        __proto__: Array(0)
        prototype: {
          __proto__: Object
          prototype: {
            __proto__: null
          }
        }
      }
    }
```
