# Functional Programming (FP)

Table of Contents

- [Functional Programming (FP)](#functional-programming-fp)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [Pure Functions](#pure-functions)
  - [Referential Transparency](#referential-transparency)
  - [Idempotence](#idempotence)
  - [Imperative vs Declarative](#imperative-vs-declarative)
  - [Immutability](#immutability)
  - [Arity](#arity)
  - [Currying](#currying)
  - [Partial Application](#partial-application)
  - [Difference between Currying and Partial Application](#difference-between-currying-and-partial-application)
  - [Memoization](#memoization)
  - [Compose and Pipe](#compose-and-pipe)
  - [Reviewing Functional Programming](#reviewing-functional-programming)

## Intro

Functional programming has the same goals in mind as object oriented programming, to keep your code understanable, easy to extend, easy to maintain, memory efficient, and DRY. Instead of objects, it uses reusable functions to create and act on data. Functional programming is based on a separation of concerns similar to object oriented programming. However, in functional programming, there is a complete separation between the data and the behaviors of a program. There is also an idea that once something is created, it should not be changed, being immutable. Unlike OOP, shared state is avoided as functional programming works on the idea of pure functions.

## Pure Functions

A pure function has no side effects to anything outside of it and given the same input will always output the same value (idempotence). They do not change any data passed into them, but create new data to return without altering the original. However, it is not possible to have 100% pure functions. At some point you need to interact with the dom or fetch an api. Even console.log makes a function unpure because it uses the window object outside of the function. Fact is a program cannot exist without side effects. So, the goal of functional programming is to minimize side effects by isolating them away from the data. Build lots of very small, reusable and predictable pure functions that do the following:

- Complete one task per function.
- Do not mutate state.
- Do not share state.
- Be predictable.
- Be composable, one input and one output.
- Be pure if possible.
- Return something.

## Referential Transparency

One important concept of functional programming is referential transparency, the ability to replace an expression with the resulting value without changing the result of the program.

```javascript
function a(num1, num2) {
  return num1 + num2;
}

function b(num) {
  return num * 2;
}

b(a(3, 4)); // 14
// a should always return 7 so it can be changed to...

b(7); // 14
// and the output remains the same
```

## Idempotence

Idempotence is another important piece of functional programming. It is the idea that given the same input to a function, you will always return the same output. The function could be used over and over again and nothing changes. This is how you make your code predictable.

## Imperative vs Declarative

Imperative programming tells the computer what to do and how to complete it. Declarative programming only tells the computer what to do, but not how to do things. Humans are declarative by nature, but computers typically need more imperative type programming. However, using higher level languages like JavaScript is actually being less imperative. This is important in function programming because we want to be more declarative to better understand our code and let the computer handle the dirty work of figuring out the best way to do something.

```javascript
// more imperative
for (let i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
  console.log(i);
}

// more declarative
let arr = [1, 2, 3];
arr.forEach((item) => console.log(item));
```

## Immutability

Immutability is simply not modifying the original data or state. Instead we should create copies of the state inside our functions and return a new version of the state.

```javascript
const obj = {name: 'Brittney'};

function clone(obj) {
  return {...obj};
}

obj.name = 'Joe';
//=> mutated the state => bad code!


function updateObj(obj) {
  const newObj = clone(obj);
  newObj.name = 'Joe';
  //=> didn't mutate the original state => better code!
  return newObj;
}

const updatedObj = updateObj(obj);

console.log(`obj = ${obj}`, `updatedObj = ${updatedObj})
// obj = {name: 'Brittney'} updatedObj = {name: 'Joe'}
```

You may be thinking that this could get really expensive, memory wise, to just copy code over and over. However, there is something called structural sharing that allows the data to only copy new information and points to the original state for any commonalities.

## Arity

Arity simply means the number of arguments a function takes. The more parameters a function has the harder it becomes to break apart and reuse. Try to stick to only one or two parameters when writing functions.

## Currying

A curried function is a function that takes multiple arguments one at a time. The arguments are kept "alive" (via closure) and are used in execution when the final function in the currying chain is returned and executed.

```javascript
function sum(a, b, c) {
  return a + b + c;
}

function sum(a) {
  return (b) => {
    return (c) => {
      return a + b + c;
    };
  };
}

const result = sum(1)(2)(3);
```

First, the sum function takes (a), and then returns a new function, that then takes (b) and returns another function, that takes (c) and returns the sum of a, b and c. Each argument is taken one at a time. If the function had more parameters, it could simply continue to return new functions until all of the arguments are supplied and the application can be completed.

The sum function takes one argument, and then returns a partial application of itself with a fixed in the closure scope.

## Partial Application

Partial application refers to the process of fixing a number of arguments to a function, producing another function of smaller arity, that expects the rest of the arguments from the first function. It is expanding on the idea of currying and taking it a step farther by separating parameters out. If you have more than 2 arguments in a function, then you can bind two of them to be used later.

```javascript
const multiply = (a, b, c) => a * b * c;
const multiplyBy5 = multiply.bind(null, 5);

multiplyBy5(4, 10);
```

The first argument to bind sets it's internal 'this' value. Since our function doesn't depend on this, we just pass in null. But any subsequent arguments that we supply will be used to permanently fix the arguments of the function we are binding. In the above case, we are only fixing one argument, but we can potentially fix as many as we want. Also, bind fixes the arguments always from left to right.

A partial application is a function which has been applied to some, but not yet all of its arguments. In other words, it’s a function which has some arguments fixed inside its closure scope. A function with some of its parameters fixed is said to be partially applied.

## Difference between Currying and Partial Application

Partial applications can take as many or as few arguments a time as desired. Curried functions on the other hand always return a unary function: a function which takes one argument.

All curried functions return partial applications, but not all partial applications are the result of curried functions.

The unary requirement for curried functions is an important feature.

## Memoization

Memoization is the programmatic practice of making long recursive/iterative functions run much faster. How, you ask? By caching the values that the function returns after its initial execution. When we input the same parameter into our memoized function, it returns the value stored in the cache instead of running the function again, thus boosting performance. No longer does your program have to recalculate every number to get a result.

```javascript
let cache = {};

function memoizedAddTo80(n) {
  if (n in cache) {
    return cache[n];
  } else {
    cache[n] = n + 80;
    return cache[n];
  }
}

memoizedAddTo80(5);
memoizedAddTo80(5);
```

We can improve the code above! Ideally we dont want to fill the cash in the global scope. Its good practice to have the cache live inside of the function, not polluting the global scope. We can do that with closures.

```javascript
function memoizedAddTo80() {
  let cache = {};
  return function (n) {
    if (n in cache) {
      return cache[n];
    } else {
      cache[n] = n + 80;
      return cache[n];
    }
  };
}

const memoized = memoizedAddTo80();
memoized(5);
memoized(5);
```

## Compose and Pipe

In JavaScript it is best for speed and efficiency to keep functions small and reusable. Function composition is the idea that you lay out your functions like a factory assembly line. The actual functions pipe() and compose() don't actually exist in JavaScript yet, but there are many libraries that use them. You can however create your own versions of them. The compose() function reads the functions from right to left and the pipe() function will read from left to right.

```javascript
const compose = (fn1, fn2) => (data) => fn1(fn2(data));
// created our own COMPOSE function

const pipe = (fn1, fn2) => (data) => fn2(fn1(data));
// created our own PIPE function

const multiplyBy3 = (num) => num * 3;
const makePositive = (num) => Math.abs(num);

const composeFn = compose(multiplyBy3, makePositive);
const pipeFn = pipe(multiplyBy3, makePositive);
// used compose and pipe to combine the above functions

composeFn(-50);
// 150

pipeFn(-50);
// 150
```

## Reviewing Functional Programming

So, is functional programming the answer to everything? No, but it is great in situations where you have to perform different operations on the same set of data. Functional programming just lays the foundation for creating reusable functions that can be moved around as needed. For example, it is great in areas of industry and machine learning and it is even in some front end libraries like React and Redux. Also here the goal is to write code more understandable, easy to extend, easy to maintain, memory efficient, and DRY!
