# OOP vs. FP

Table of Contents

- [OOP vs. FP](#oop-vs-fp)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [OOP Problems](#oop-problems)
  - [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## Intro

Composition is what we just did with FP, creating small reusable functions to make code modular. Inheritance is what we did with OOP, creating a class and extending it to subclasses that inherit the properties. In OOP we create few operations on common data that is stateful with side effects. In FP we create many operations on fixed data with pure functions that don't mutate state. There is a big debate over which one is better and most people believe that composition is better.

## OOP Problems

One of the drawbacks to inheritance is that it is based on the fact that it won't change, we tell it what it is. We create a class and give it properties and methods that describe the class. But say, down the road, we need to update that class and add more functionality. Adding a new method to the base class will create rippling effects through your entire program. FP is more declarative, what to do not how, and OOP is more imperative, what and how to do something. This is the tight coupling problem, things having to depend on one another, which leads to the fragile base class problem, seemingly safe changes cause unforeseen repercussions. It is the opposite of small reusable code. Changing one small thing in either of the class or subclasses could break the program. Another problem is hierarchy where you may need to create a subclass that can only do 1 part of the class, but instead you get everything passed down to it.

## Conclusion

Composition is probably a better tool to use when creating programs because it creates a more stable environment that is easier to change in the future. The key is to decide which structure is better for your project. You can use ideas from both of these styles to write your code. React uses OOP in class components to extend inheritance and then uses FP in the pure components.
