# Asynchronus JavaScript

Table of Contents

- [Asynchronus JavaScript](#asynchronus-javascript)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [Promises](#promises)
    - [Creating a Promise Object](#creating-a-promise-object)
    - [Executor Function](#executor-function)
    - [The setTimeout() Function](#the-settimeout-function)
    - [States of Promises](#states-of-promises)
    - [The 'then()' Method](#the-then-method)
    - [The 'catch()' Method](#the-catch-method)
    - [The 'finally()' Method](#the-finally-method)
    - [Chaining Multiple Promises](#chaining-multiple-promises)
    - [Avoiding Common Mistakes](#avoiding-common-mistakes)
    - [Promise.all()](#promiseall)
    - [Promise.allSettled()](#promiseallsettled)
  - [Async... Await](#async-await)
    - [The 'async' Keyword](#the-async-keyword)
    - [The 'await' Operator](#the-await-operator)
    - [Writing async Functions](#writing-async-functions)
    - [Dependent Promises](#dependent-promises)
    - [Handling Errors](#handling-errors)
    - [Independent Promises](#independent-promises)
    - [Await Promise.all()](#await-promiseall)
  - [Job Queue](#job-queue)
  - [Parallel, Sequence, Race](#parallel-sequence-race)
  - [Real Life Examples](#real-life-examples)

## Intro

In web development, asynchronous programming is notorious for being a challenging topic.

An asynchronous operation is one that allows the computer to “move on” to other tasks while waiting for the asynchronous operation to complete. Asynchronous programming means that time-consuming operations don’t have to bring everything else in our programs to a halt.

Web development makes use of asynchronous operations. Operations like making a network request or querying a database can be time-consuming, but JavaScript allows us to execute other tasks while awaiting their completion.

## Promises

A JavaScript Promise is an object that can be used to get the outcome of an asynchronous operation when that result is not instantly available.

Since JavaScript code runs in a non-blocking manner, promises become essential when we have to wait for some asynchronous operation without holding back the execution of the rest of the code.

### Creating a Promise Object

An instance of a JavaScript Promise object is created using the new keyword. The constructor of the Promise object takes a function, known as the executor function, as the argument. This function is responsible for resolving or rejecting the promise.

```javascript
const executorFn = (resolve, reject) => {
  console.log('The executor function of the promise!');
};

const promise = new Promise(executorFn);
```

### Executor Function

A JavaScript promise’s executor function takes two functions as its arguments. The first parameter represents the function that should be called to resolve the promise and the other one is used when the promise should be rejected. A Promise object may use any one or both of them inside its executor function.

The resolve() and reject() functions aren’t defined by the programmer. When the Promise constructor runs, JavaScript will pass **its own** resolve() and reject() functions into the executor function.

- **resolve** is a function with one argument. Under the hood, if invoked, resolve() will change the promise’s status from pending to fulfilled, and the promise’s resolved value will be set to the argument passed into resolve().
- **reject** is a function that takes a reason or error as an argument. Under the hood, if invoked, reject() will change the promise’s status from pending to rejected, and the promise’s rejection reason will be set to the argument passed into reject().

Let’s look at an example executor function in a Promise constructor:

```javascript
const executorFunction = (resolve, reject) => {
  if (someCondition) {
    resolve('I resolved!');
  } else {
    reject('I rejected!');
  }
};
const myFirstPromise = new Promise(executorFunction);
```

Let’s break down what’s happening above:

- We declare a variable myFirstPromise
- myFirstPromise is constructed using new Promise() which is the Promise constructor method.
- executorFunction() is passed to the constructor and has two functions as parameters: resolve and reject.
- If someCondition evaluates to true, we invoke resolve() with the string 'I resolved!'
- If not, we invoke reject() with the string 'I rejected!'

In our example, myFirstPromise resolves or rejects based on a simple condition, but, in practice, promises settle based on the results of asynchronous operations. For example, a database request may fulfill with the data from a query or reject with an error thrown. In this exercise, we constructed a promise which resolves synchronously to more easily understand how they work.

### The setTimeout() Function

Knowing how to construct a promise is useful, but most of the time, knowing how to consume, or use, promises will be key. Rather than constructing promises, you’ll be handling Promise objects returned to you as the result of an asynchronous operation. These promises will start off pending but settle eventually.

We’ll be simulating this by providing you with functions that return promises which settle after some time. To accomplish this, we’ll be using setTimeout(). setTimeout() is a Node API (a comparable API is provided by web browsers) that uses callback functions to schedule tasks to be performed after a delay. setTimeout() has two parameters: a callback function and a delay in milliseconds.

```javascript
const delayedHello = () => {
  console.log('Hi! This is an asynchronous greeting!');
};

setTimeout(delayedHello, 2000);
```

Here, we invoke setTimeout() with the callback function delayedHello() and 2000. In at least two seconds delayedHello() will be invoked. But why is it “at least” two seconds and not exactly two seconds?

This delay is performed asynchronously—the rest of our program won’t stop executing during the delay. Asynchronous JavaScript uses something called the event-loop. After two seconds, delayedHello() is added to a line of code waiting to be run. Before it can run, any synchronous code from the program will run. Next, any code in front of it in the line will run. This means it might be more than two seconds before delayedHello() is actually executed.

Let’s look at how we’ll be using setTimeout() to construct asynchronous promises:

```javascript
const returnPromiseFunction = () => {
  return new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    setTimeout(() => {
      resolve('I resolved!');
    }, 1000);
  });
};

const prom = returnPromiseFunction();
```

In the example code, we invoked returnPromiseFunction() which returned a promise. We assigned that promise to the variable prom. Similar to the asynchronous promises you may encounter in production, prom will initially have a status of pending.

### States of Promises

A JavaScript promise object can be in one of three states: pending, resolved, or rejected.

While the value is not yet available, the Promise stays in the pending state. Afterwards, it transitions to one of the two states: resolved or rejected. We refer to a promise as settled if it is no longer pending.

A resolved promise stands for a successful completion. Due to errors, the promise may go in the rejected state.

In the given code block, if the Promise is on resolved state, the first parameter holding a callback function of the then() method will print the resolved value. Otherwise, an alert will be shown.

```javascript
const promise = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  const res = true;
  if (res) {
    resolve('Resolved!');
  } else {
    reject(Error('Error'));
  }
});

promise.then(
  (res) => console.log(res),
  (err) => alert(err)
);
```

### The 'then()' Method

The initial state of an asynchronous promise is pending, but we have a guarantee that it will settle. How do we tell the computer what should happen then? Promise objects come with an aptly named .then() method. It allows us to say, “I have a promise, when it settles, then here’s what I want to happen…”

then() is a higher-order function— it takes two callback functions as arguments. We refer to these callbacks as handlers. When the promise settles, the appropriate handler will be invoked with that settled value.

- The first handler, sometimes called onFulfilled, is a success handler, and it should contain the logic for the promise resolving.
- The second handler, sometimes called onRejected, is a failure handler, and it should contain the logic for the promise rejecting.

```javascript
const promise = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    resolve('Result');
  }, 200);
});

promise.then(
  (res) => {
    console.log(res);
  },
  (err) => {
    alert(err);
  }
);
```

We can invoke .then() with one, both, or neither handler! This allows for flexibility, but it can also make for tricky debugging. If the appropriate handler is not provided, instead of throwing an error, .then() will just return a promise with the same settled value as the promise it was called on. Therefore we won’t know whether a promise will resolve or reject, so we’ll need to provide the logic for either case. One important feature of .then() is that it always returns a promise.

### The 'catch()' Method

One way to write cleaner code is to follow a principle called separation of concerns. Separation of concerns means organizing code into distinct sections each handling a specific task. It enables us to quickly navigate our code and know where to look if something isn’t working.

Remember, .then() will return a promise with the same settled value as the promise it was called on if no appropriate handler was provided. This implementation allows us to separate our resolved logic from our rejected logic. Instead of passing both handlers into one .then(), we can chain a second .then() with a failure handler to a first .then() with a success handler and both cases will be handled.

```javascript
prom
  .then((resolvedValue) => {
    console.log(resolvedValue);
  })
  .then(null, (rejectionReason) => {
    console.log(rejectionReason);
  });
```

To create even more readable code, we can use a different promise function: .catch().

The .catch() function takes only one argument, onRejected. In the case of a rejected promise, this failure handler will be invoked with the reason for rejection. Using .catch() accomplishes the same thing as using a .then() with only a failure handler.

Let’s look at an example using .catch():

```javascript
prom
  .then((resolvedValue) => {
    console.log(resolvedValue);
  })
  .catch((rejectionReason) => {
    console.log(rejectionReason);
  });
```

Let’s break down what’s happening in the example code:

- prom is a promise which randomly either resolves with 'Yay!' or rejects with 'Oh no!'.
- We pass a success handler to .then() and a failure handler to .catch().
- If the promise resolves, .then()‘s success handler will be invoked with 'Yay!'.
- If the promise rejects, .then() will return a promise with the same rejection reason as the original promise and .catch()‘s failure handler will be invoked with that rejection reason.

### The 'finally()' Method

The finally() method returns a Promise. When the promise is settled, the specified callback function is executed. This provides a way for code to be run whether the promise was fulfilled successfully or rejected once the Promise has been dealt with.

This helps to avoid duplicating code in both the promise's then() and catch() handlers.

```javascript
promise.finally(onFinally);

promise.finally(function () {
  // settled (fulfilled or rejected)
});
```

The finally() method is very similar to calling .then(onFinally, onFinally) however there are a couple of differences:

- When creating a function, you can pass it once, instead of being forced to either declare it twice, or create a variable for it.
- A finally callback will not receive any argument, since there's no reliable means of determining if the promise was fulfilled or rejected. This use case is for precisely when you do not care about the rejection reason, or the fulfillment value, and so there's no need to provide it.

So for example:

- Unlike `Promise.resolve(1).then(() => {}, () => {})` (which will be resolved with undefined), `Promise.resolve(1).finally(() => {})` will be resolved with 1.
- Similarly, unlike `Promise.reject(2).then(() => {}, () => {})` (which will be fulfilled with undefined), `Promise.reject(2).finally(() => {})` will be rejected with 2.

### Chaining Multiple Promises

One common pattern we’ll see with asynchronous programming is multiple operations which depend on each other to execute or that must be executed in a certain order. We might make one request to a database and use the data returned to us to make another request and so on!

The .then() method returns a Promise, even if one or both of the handler functions are absent. Because of this, multiple .then() methods can be chained together. This is known as composition. Chaining helps streamline the development process because it makes the code more readable and easier to debug.

In the code block, a couple of .then() methods are chained together. Each method deals with the resolved value of their respective promises.

```javascript
firstPromiseFunction()
  .then((firstResolveVal) => {
    return secondPromiseFunction(firstResolveVal);
  })
  .then((secondResolveVal) => {
    console.log(secondResolveVal);
  });
```

Let’s break down what’s happening in the example:

- We invoke a function firstPromiseFunction() which returns a promise.
- We invoke .then() with an anonymous function as the success handler.
- Inside the success handler we return a new promise— the result of invoking a second function, secondPromiseFunction() with the first promise’s resolved value.
- We invoke a second .then() to handle the logic for the second promise settling.
- Inside that .then(), we have a success handler which will log the second promise’s resolved value to the console.

In order for our chain to work properly, we had to return the promise secondPromiseFunction(firstResolveVal). This ensured that the return value of the first .then() was our second promise rather than the default return of a new promise with the same settled value as the initial.

### Avoiding Common Mistakes

Promise composition allows for much more readable code than the nested callback syntax that preceded it. However, it can still be easy to make mistakes. In this exercise, we’ll go over two common mistakes with promise composition.

- **Mistake 1:** Nesting promises instead of chaining them.

```javascript
firstPromiseFunction().then((firstResolveVal) => {
  return secondPromiseFunction(firstResolveVal).then((secondResolveVal) => {
    console.log(secondResolveVal);
  });
});
```

Let’s break down what’s happening in the above code:

- We invoke returnsFirstPromise() which returns a promise.
- We invoke .then() with a success handler.
- Inside the success handler, we invoke returnsSecondValue() with firstResolveVal which will return a new promise.
- We invoke a second .then() to handle the logic for the second promise settling all inside the first then()!
- Inside that second .then(), we have a success handler which will log the second promise’s resolved value to the console.

Instead of having a clean chain of promises, we’ve nested the logic for one inside the logic of the other. Imagine if we were handling five or ten promises!

- **Mistake 2:** Forgetting to return a promise.

```javascript
returnsFirstPromise()
  .then((firstResolveVal) => {
    returnsSecondValue(firstResolveVal);
  })
  .then((someVal) => {
    console.log(someVal);
  });
```

Let’s break down what’s happening in the example:

- We invoke returnsFirstPromise() which returns a promise.
- We invoke .then() with a success handler.
- Inside the success handler, we create our second promise, but we forget to return it!
- We invoke a second .then(). It’s supposed to handle the logic for the second promise, but since we didn’t return, this .then() is invoked on a promise with the same settled value as the original promise!

Since forgetting to return our promise won’t throw an error, this can be a really tricky thing to debug!

### Promise.all()

When done correctly, promise composition is a great way to handle situations where asynchronous operations depend on each other or execution order matters. What if we’re dealing with multiple promises, but we don’t care about the order?

To maximize efficiency we should use concurrency, multiple asynchronous operations happening together. With promises, we can do this with the function Promise.all().

Promise.all() accepts an array of promises as its argument and returns a single promise. That single promise will settle in one of two ways:

- If every promise in the argument array resolves, the single promise returned from Promise.all() will resolve with an array containing the resolve value from each promise in the argument array.
- If any promise from the argument array rejects, the single promise returned from Promise.all() will immediately reject with the reason that promise rejected. This behavior is sometimes referred to as failing fast.

```javascript
let myPromises = Promise.all([
  returnsPromOne(),
  returnsPromTwo(),
  returnsPromThree(),
]);

myPromises
  .then((arrayOfValues) => {
    console.log(arrayOfValues);
  })
  .catch((rejectionReason) => {
    console.log(rejectionReason);
  });
```

Let’s break down what’s happening:

We declare myPromises assigned to invoking Promise.all().
We invoke Promise.all() with an array of three promises— the returned values from functions.
We invoke .then() with a success handler which will print the array of resolved values if each promise resolves successfully.
We invoke .catch() with a failure handler which will print the first rejection message if any promise rejects.

### Promise.allSettled()

What will happen when we run the code below?

```javascript
const promiseOne = new Promise((resolve, reject) => setTimeout(resolve, 3000));
const promiseTwo = new Promise((resolve, reject) => setTimeout(rejecr, 3000));

Promise.all([promiseOne, promiseTwo]).then((data) => console.log(data));

// Uncaught (in promise) undefined
```

We learnd that Promise.all only resolves if both promises of the array resolve. In order for the above code to work we have to do a catch statement.

```javascript
Promise.all([promiseOne, promiseTwo])
  .then((data) => console.log(data))
  .catch((e) => console.log('something failed', e));
```

Promise.allSettled() is a little different than Promise.all(). This time if we run the same code we have promises returning:

```javascript
const promiseOne = new Promise((resolve, reject) => setTimeout(resolve, 3000));
const promiseTwo = new Promise((resolve, reject) => setTimeout(rejecr, 3000));

Promise.allSettled([promiseOne, promiseTwo]).then((data) => console.log(data));

// [{...}, {...}]
```

Promise.allSettled does not care about resolve and reject. It will run all promises regardless whether they reject or not, unlike Promise.all(). So the promise comes back when all promises in the array are complete.

## Async... Await

JavaScript is continually improving, and ES8 provides a new syntax for handling our asynchronous action, async...await. It is an alternative to chaining .then() methods. The async...await syntax allows us to write asynchronous code that reads similarly to traditional synchronous, imperative programs.

The async...await syntax is syntactic sugar— it doesn’t introduce new functionality into the language, but rather introduces a new syntax for using promises. Despite this, async...await powerfully improves the readability and scalability of our code.

### The 'async' Keyword

The async keyword is used to write functions that handle asynchronous actions. We wrap our asynchronous logic inside a function prepended with the async keyword. Then, we invoke that function.

```javascript
async function myFunc() {
  // Function body here
}

myFunc();
```

We’ll be using async function declarations throughout this lesson, but we can also create async function expressions:

```javascript
const myFunc = async () => {
  // Function body here
};

myFunc();
```

Async functions always return a promise. This means we can use traditional promise syntax, like .then() and .catch with our async functions. An async function will return in one of three ways:

- If there’s nothing returned from the function, it will return a promise with a resolved value of undefined.
- If there’s a non-promise value returned from the function, it will return a promise resolved to that value.
- If a promise is returned from the function, it will simply return that promise

```javascript
async function fivePromise() {
  return 5;
}

fivePromise().then((resolvedValue) => {
  console.log(resolvedValue);
});
```

In the example above, even though we return 5 inside the function body, what’s actually returned when we invoke fivePromise() is a promise with a resolved value of 5.

### The 'await' Operator

Async functions are almost always used with the additional keyword await inside the function body.

The await keyword can only be used inside an async function. Await is an operator: it returns the resolved value of a promise. Since promises resolve in an indeterminate amount of time, await halts, or pauses, the execution of our async function until a given promise is resolved.

In most situations, we’re dealing with promises that were returned from functions. Generally, these functions are through a library, and, in this lesson, we’ll be providing them. We can await the resolution of the promise it returns inside an async function. In the example below, myPromise() is a function that returns a promise which will resolve to the string "I am resolved now!".

```javascript
async function asyncFuncExample() {
  let resolvedValue = await myPromise();
  console.log(resolvedValue);
}

asyncFuncExample(); // Prints: I am resolved now!
```

Within our async function, asyncFuncExample(), we use await to halt our execution until myPromise() is resolved and assign its resolved value to the variable resolvedValue. Then we log resolvedValue to the console. We’re able to handle the logic for a promise in a way that reads like synchronous code.

### Writing async Functions

We’ve seen that the await keyword halts the execution of an async function until a promise is no longer pending. Don’t forget the await keyword! It may seem obvious, but this can be a tricky mistake to catch because our function will still run— it just won’t have the desired results.

We’re going to explore this using the following function, which returns a promise that resolves to 'Yay, I resolved!' after a 1 second delay:

```javascript
let myPromise = () => {
  return new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    setTimeout(() => {
      resolve('Yay, I resolved!');
    }, 1000);
  });
};
```

Now we’ll write two async functions which invoke myPromise():

```javascript
async function noAwait() {
  let value = myPromise();
  console.log(value);
}

async function yesAwait() {
  let value = await myPromise();
  console.log(value);
}

noAwait(); // Prints: Promise { <pending> }
yesAwait(); // Prints: Yay, I resolved!
```

In the first async function, noAwait(), we left off the await keyword before myPromise(). In the second, yesAwait(), we included it. The noAwait() function logs Promise { `<pending>` } to the console. Without the await keyword, the function execution wasn’t paused. The console.log() on the following line was executed before the promise had resolved.

Remember that the await operator returns the resolved value of a promise. When used properly in yesAwait(), the variable value was assigned the resolved value of the myPromise() promise, whereas in noAwait(), value was assigned the promise object itself.

### Dependent Promises

The true beauty of async...await is when we have a series of asynchronous actions which depend on one another. For example, we may make a network request based on a query to a database. In that case, we would need to wait to make the network request until we had the results from the database. With native promise syntax, we use a chain of .then() functions making sure to return correctly each one:

```javascript
function nativePromiseVersion() {
  returnsFirstPromise()
    .then((firstValue) => {
      console.log(firstValue);
      return returnsSecondPromise(firstValue);
    })
    .then((secondValue) => {
      console.log(secondValue);
    });
}
```

Let’s break down what’s happening in the nativePromiseVersion() function:

- Within our function we use two functions which return promises: returnsFirstPromise() and returnsSecondPromise().
- We invoke returnsFirstPromise() and ensure that the first promise resolved by using .then().
- In the callback of our first .then(), we log the resolved value of the first promise, firstValue, and then return returnsSecondPromise(firstValue).
- We use another .then() to print the second promise’s resolved value to the console.

Here’s how we’d write an async function to accomplish the same thing:

```javascript
async function asyncAwaitVersion() {
  let firstValue = await returnsFirstPromise();
  console.log(firstValue);
  let secondValue = await returnsSecondPromise(firstValue);
  console.log(secondValue);
}
```

Let’s break down what’s happening in our asyncAwaitVersion() function:

- We mark our function as async.
- Inside our function, we create a variable firstValue assigned await returnsFirstPromise(). This means firstValue is assigned the resolved value of the awaited promise.
- Next, we log firstValue to the console.
- Then, we create a variable secondValue assigned to await returnsSecondPromise(firstValue). Therefore, secondValue is assigned this promise’s resolved value.
- Finally, we log secondValue to the console.

Though using the async...await syntax can save us some typing, the length reduction isn’t the main point. Given the two versions of the function, the async...await version more closely resembles synchronous code, which helps developers maintain and debug their code. The async...await syntax also makes it easy to store and refer to resolved values from promises further back in our chain which is a much more difficult task with native promise syntax.

### Handling Errors

When .catch() is used with a long promise chain, there is no indication of where in the chain the error was thrown. This can make debugging challenging.

With async...await, we use try...catch statements for error handling. By using this syntax, not only are we able to handle errors in the same way we do with synchronous code, but we can also catch both synchronous and asynchronous errors. This makes for easier debugging!

```javascript
async function usingTryCatch() {
  try {
    let resolveValue = await asyncFunction('thing that will fail');
    let secondValue = await secondAsyncFunction(resolveValue);
  } catch (err) {
    console.log(err);
  }
}

usingTryCatch();
```

Remember, since async functions return promises we can still use native promise’s .catch() with an async function.

```javascript
async function usingPromiseCatch() {
  let resolveValue = await asyncFunction('thing that will fail');
}

let rejectedPromise = usingPromiseCatch();
rejectedPromise.catch((rejectValue) => {
  console.log(rejectValue);
});
```

This is sometimes used in the global scope to catch final errors in complex code.

### Independent Promises

Remember that await halts the execution of our async function. This allows us to conveniently write synchronous-style code to handle dependent promises. But what if our async function contains multiple promises which are not dependent on the results of one another to execute?

```javascript
async function waiting() {
  const firstValue = await firstAsyncThing();
  const secondValue = await secondAsyncThing();
  console.log(firstValue, secondValue);
}

async function concurrent() {
  const firstPromise = firstAsyncThing();
  const secondPromise = secondAsyncThing();
  console.log(await firstPromise, await secondPromise);
}
```

In the waiting() function, we pause our function until the first promise resolves, then we construct the second promise. Once that resolves, we print both resolved values to the console.

In our concurrent() function, both promises are constructed without using await. Each promise can be awaited once its value is required by program logic. We then await each of their resolutions to print them to the console.

With our concurrent() function both promises’ asynchronous operations can be run simultaneously. If possible, we want to get started on each asynchronous operation as soon as possible! Within our async functions we should still take advantage of concurrency, the ability to perform asynchronous actions at the same time.

**Note:** _If we have multiple truly independent promises that we would like to execute fully in parallel, we must use individual .then() methods and avoid halting our execution with await._

### Await Promise.all()

Another way to take advantage of concurrency when we have multiple promises which can be executed simultaneously is to await a Promise.all().

We can pass an array of promises as the argument to Promise.all(), and it will return a single promise. This promise will resolve when all of the promises in the argument array have resolved. This promise’s resolve value will be an array containing the resolved values of each promise from the argument array.

```javascript
async function asyncPromAll() {
  const resultArray = await Promise.all([
    asyncTask1(),
    asyncTask2(),
    asyncTask3(),
    asyncTask4(),
  ]);
  for (let i = 0; i < resultArray.length; i++) {
    console.log(resultArray[i]);
  }
}
```

In our above example, we await the resolution of a Promise.all(). This Promise.all() was invoked with an argument array containing four promises (returned from required-in functions). Next, we loop through our resultArray, and log each item to the console. The first element in resultArray is the resolved value of the asyncTask1() promise, the second is the value of the asyncTask2() promise, and so on.

Promise.all() allows us to take advantage of asynchronicity— each of the four asynchronous tasks can process concurrently. Promise.all() also has the benefit of failing fast, meaning it won’t wait for the rest of the asynchronous actions to complete once any one has rejected. As soon as the first promise in the array rejects, the promise returned from Promise.all() will reject with that reason. As it was when working with native promises, Promise.all() is a good choice if multiple asynchronous tasks are all required, but none must wait for any other before executing.

## Job Queue

In the Event Loop Model, besides the callback queue there is a job queue as well.

Promises are native in JavaScript. Unlike using the Web API we now have a native way to handle asynchronus code, using Promises. To accomodate the addition of Promises to JavaScript the job queue was introduceed. This queue is similar to the callback queue but has a higher priority. This means that the event loop is going to check the job queue first and push tasks to the call stack before it start looking at the callback queue.

## Parallel, Sequence, Race

When it comes to promises there are three ways to run them, especially when you have multiple promises:

- Parallel
- Sequencial
- Race

```javascript
const promisify = (item, delay) =>
  new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(() => resolve(item), delay));

const a = () => promisify('a', 1000);
const b = () => promisify('b', 5000);
const c = () => promisify('c', 3000);
```

```javascript
async function parallel() {
  const promises = [a(), b(), c()];
  const [output1, output2, output3] = await Promise.all(promises);
  return `paralel is done: ${output1} ${output2} ${output3}`;
}

parallel().then(consloe.log);
//parallel is done: a b c (5000ms)
```

```javascript
async function sequence() {
  const output1 = await a();
  const output2 = await b();
  const output3 = await c();
  return `sequence is done: ${output1} ${output2} ${output3} `;
}

sequence().then(consloe.log);
//sequence is done: a b c (9000ms)
```

```javascript
async function race() {
  const promises = [a(), b(), c()];
  const output1 = await Promise.race(promises);
  return `race is done: ${output1}`;
}

race().then(consloe.log);
//race is done: a (1000ms)
```

When we run all function together it doesnt matter in which order we put them because they are all asynchronus. When we actually receive the promises that is when the .then() is run:

```javascript
parallel().then(consloe.log);
sequence().then(consloe.log);
race().then(consloe.log);

//1. race is done: a (1000ms)
//2. parallel is done: a b c (5000ms)
//3. sequence is done: a b c (9000ms)
```

## Real Life Examples

```javascript
fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/users')
  .then((resp) => resp.json())
  .then(console.log);

async function fetchUsers() {
  const resp = await fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/users');
  const data = await resp.json();
  console.log(data);
}
```

```javascript
const urls = [
  'https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/users',
  'https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts',
  'https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/albums',
];

Promise.all(urls.map((url) => fetch(url).then((resp) => resp.json())))
  .then((array) => {
    console.log('users', array[0]);
    console.log('posts', array[1]);
    console.log('albums', array[2]);
  })
  .catch('error');

const getData = async function () {
  try {
    const [users, posts, albums] = await Promise.all(
      urls.map((url) => fetch(url).then((resp) => resp.json()))
    );
    console.log('users', users);
    console.log('posts', posts);
    console.log('albums', albums);
  } catch (err) {
    console.log('error', err);
  }
};
```
