# Requests

Table of Contents

- [Requests](#requests)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [JSON: JavaScript Object Notation](#json-javascript-object-notation)
  - [Asynchronous calls with XMLHttpRequest](#asynchronous-calls-with-xmlhttprequest)
  - [HTTP GET Request](#http-get-request)
    - [The Query String in a URL](#the-query-string-in-a-url)
  - [HTTP POST request](#http-post-request)
  - [Fetch API Function](#fetch-api-function)
    - [JSON Formatted Response Body](#json-formatted-response-body)
    - [The .ok Property](#the-ok-property)
  - [Async Await Syntax](#async-await-syntax)
  - [Examples](#examples)
    - [XHR GET Requests](#xhr-get-requests)
    - [XHR POST Requests](#xhr-post-requests)
    - [GET Requests using fetch()](#get-requests-using-fetch)
    - [POST Requests using fetch()](#post-requests-using-fetch)
    - [Async GET Requests](#async-get-requests)
    - [Async POST Requests](#async-post-requests)
  - [Recapitulation](#recapitulation)

## Intro

Have you ever wondered what happens after you click a “Submit” button on a web page? For instance, if you are submitting information, where does the information go? How is the information processed? The answer to the previous questions revolves around HTTP requests.

There are many types of HTTP requests. The four most commonly used types of HTTP requests are GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE.

## JSON: JavaScript Object Notation

JSON or JavaScript Object Notation is a data format suitable for transporting data to and from a server.

It is essentially a slightly stricter version of a Javascript object. A JSON object should be enclosed in curly braces and may contain one or more property-value pairs. JSON names require double quotes, while standard Javascript objects do not.

```javascript
const jsonObj = {
  name: 'Rick',
  id: '11A',
  level: 4,
};
```

## Asynchronous calls with XMLHttpRequest

Asynchronous JavaScript and XML (AJAX) enables HTTP requests to be made not only during the load time of a web page but also anytime after a page initially loads. This allows adding dynamic behavior to a webpage. This is essential for giving a good user experience without reloading the webpage for transferring data to and from the web server.

The XMLHttpRequest (XHR) web API provides the ability to make the actual asynchronous request and uses AJAX to handle the data from the request.

The given code block is a basic example of how an HTTP GET request is made to the specified URL:

```javascript
const xhr = new XMLHttpRequest();
xhr.open('GET', 'mysite.com/api/getjson');
```

## HTTP GET Request

HTTP GET requests are made with the intention of retrieving information or data from a source/server over the web. GET requests have no body, so the information that the source requires, in order to return the proper response, must be included in the request URL path or query string.

The request type (GET), response type, request URL, and handler for the response data must be provided in order to make an HTTP GET request with the JavaScript XMLHttpRequest API.

```javascript
const req = new XMLHttpRequest();
req.responseType = 'json';
req.open('GET', '/myendpoint/getdata?id=65');
req.onload = () => {
  console.log(xhr.response);
};

req.send();
```

### The Query String in a URL

Query strings are used to send additional information to the server during an HTTP GET request. The query string is separated from the original URL using the question mark character. In a query string, there can be one or more key-value pairs joined by the equal character. For separating multiple key-value pairs, an ampersand character is used Query strings should be url-encoded in case of the presence of URL unsafe characters.

```javascript
const requestUrl = 'http://mysite.com/api/vendor?name=kavin&id=35412';
```

## HTTP POST request

HTTP POST requests are made with the intention of sending new information to the source/server, in addition to requesting it. For a POST request, the new information is stored in the body of the request.

To make an HTTP POST request with the JavaScript XMLHttpRequest API, a request type (POST), response type, request URL, request body, and handler for the response data must be provided. The request body is essential because the information sent via the POST method is not visible in the URL. The request type must be POST for this case. The response type can be a variety of types including array buffer, json, etc.

```javascript
const data = {
  fish: 'Salmon',
  weight: '1.5 KG',
  units: 5,
};
const xhr = new XMLHttpRequest();
xhr.open('POST', '/inventory/add');
xhr.responseType = 'json';
xhr.send(JSON.stringify(data));

xhr.onload = () => {
  console.log(xhr.response);
};
```

## Fetch API Function

A JavaScript Fetch API is used to access and manipulate requests and responses within the HTTP pipeline, fetching resources asynchronously across a network.

The function fetch() can be used to create requests. By accepting additional arguments, the request can be customized. This can be used to change the request type, headers, specify a request body, and much more as shown in the example block of code.

```javascript
fetch('https://api-to-call.com/endpoint', {
  method: 'POST',
  body: JSON.stringify({ id: '200' }),
})
  .then(
    (response) => {
      if (response.ok) {
        return response.json();
      }
      throw new Error('Request failed!');
    },
    (networkError) => {
      console.log(networkError.message);
    }
  )
  .then((jsonResponse) => {
    console.log(jsonResponse);
  });
```

The fetch() function:

- Creates a request object that contains relevant information that an API needs.
- Sends that request object to the API endpoint provided.
- Returns a promise that ultimately resolves to a response object, which contains the status of the promise with information the API sent back.

A basic fetch() request will accept a URL parameter, send a request and contain a success and failure promise handler function. In the example, the block of code begins by calling the fetch() function. Then a then() method is chained to the end of the fetch(). It ends with the response callback to handle success and the rejection callback to handle failure.

```javascript
fetch('url')
.then(
  response  => {
    console.log(response);
  },
 rejection => {
    console.error(rejection.message);
);
```

### JSON Formatted Response Body

The .json() method will resolve a returned promise to a JSON object, parsing the body text as JSON.

The example block of code shows the .json() method that returns a promise that resolves to a JSON-formatted response body as a JavaScript object.

```javascript
fetch('url-that-returns-JSON')
  .then((response) => response.json())
  .then((jsonResponse) => {
    console.log(jsonResponse);
  });
```

### The .ok Property

In the Fetch API function fetch() the ok property of a response checks to see if it evaluates to true or false. In the code example the .ok property will be true when the HTTP request is successful. The .ok property will be false when the HTTP request is unsuccessful.

```javascript
 fetch(url, {
    method: 'POST',
    headers: {
      'Content-type': 'application/json',
      'apikey': apiKey
    },
    body: data
  }).then(response => {
    if (response.ok) {
      return response.json();
    }
    throw new Error('Request failed!');
  }, networkError => {
    console.log(networkError.message)
  })
}
```

## Async Await Syntax

The async…await syntax is used with the JS Fetch API fetch() to work with promises. In the code block example we see the keyword async placed the function. This means that the function will return a promise. The keyword await makes the JavaScript wait until the problem is resolved.

```javascript
const getSuggestions = async () => {
  const wordQuery = inputField.value;
  const endpoint = `${url}${queryParams}${wordQuery}`;
  try {
    const response = await fetch(endpoint, { cache: 'no-cache' });
    if (response.ok) {
      const jsonResponse = await response.json();
    }
  } catch (error) {
    console.log(error);
  }
};
```

## Examples

### XHR GET Requests

```javascript
//creates new object:
const xhr = new XMLHttpRequest();

const url = 'http://api-to-call.com/endpoint';

//handles response:
xhr.responseType = 'json';
xhr.onreadystatechange = () => {
  if (xhr.readyState === XMLHttpRequest.DONE) {
    return xhr.response;
  }
};

//opens request and sends object:
xhr.open('GET', url);
xhr.send();
```

- First, we create the XMLHttpRequest object using the new operator. While the code will work regardless of how you name your variables, it is a common practice to name this object xhr.

- Next we save the URL to a const called url. Make sure the URL is wrapped in quotes so that it is a string.

- We then set the responseType property of the xhr object to equal 'json'. JSON is JavaScript Object Notation, which is how the response is going to be formatted.

- Next we set the xhr.onreadystatechange event handler equal to an anonymous arrow function. In the code block of the function we add this conditional statement: `if (xhr.readyState === XMLHttpRequest. DONE) {}`. The purpose of this conditional statement checks to see if the request has finished.

- In the code block of the conditional statement, we return the response property of xhr.

- Then we call the .open() method on the xhr object and pass it 'GET' and url as arguments. The .open() method creates a new request and the arguments passed in determine the type and URL of the request.

- Finally, we call the .send() method on the xhr object to send the request.

- Nice work! You’ve written the boilerplate code for an AJAX GET request using an XMLHttpRequest object.

### XHR POST Requests

```javascript
//creates new object:
const xhr = new XMLHttpRequest();

const url = 'http://api-to-call.com/endpoint';

//converts data to a string:
const data = JSON.stringify({ id: '200' });

//handles response:
xhr.responseType = 'json';
xhr.onreadystatechange = () => {
  if (xhr.readyState === XMLHttpRequest.DONE) {
    return xhr.response;
  }
};

//opens request and sends object:
xhr.open('POST', url);
xhr.send(data);
```

- First, we create the XMLHttpRequest object using the new operator. The XMLHttpRequest object is used in JavaScript to interact with servers.

- Next we save the URL to a const called url. Make sure the URL is wrapped in quotes so that it is a string. The URL will direct the request to the correct server.

- Additionally to a GET request, we create a new const called data, and save this line of code to it: `JSON.stringify({id: '200'});` JSON.stringify() will convert a value to a JSON string. By converting the value to a string, we can then send the data to a server.

- We then set the responseType property of the xhr object to equal 'json'. JSON is JavaScript Object Notation, which is how the response is going to be formatted.

- Next we set the xhr.onreadystatechange event handler equal to an anonymous arrow function. The .onreadystatechange will contain the event handler that will be called when xhr‘s state changes.

- In the code block of the function we add this conditional statement: `if (xhr.readyState === XMLHttpRequest. DONE) {}`. The purpose of this conditional statement checks to see if the request has finished.

- In the code block of the conditional statement, we return the response property of xhr. The response property will contain the data that we’re getting back from the POST request.

- Then we call the .open() method on the xhr object and pass it 'POST' and url as arguments. The .open() method creates a new request and the arguments passed in determine what type of request is being made and where it’s being made to.

- Finally, we call the .send() method on the xhr object and pass data as an argument. The .send() method will send the request to the server.

- Nice work! You’ve written the boilerplate code for an AJAX POST request using an XMLHttpRequest object.

### GET Requests using fetch()

```javascript
//sends request:
fetch('http://api-to-call.com/endpoint')
  //converts response object to JSON:
  .then(
    (response) => {
      if (response.ok) {
        return response.json();
      }
      //handles errors:
      throw new Error('Request failed!');
    },
    (networkError) => console.log(networkError.message)
  )
  //handles succes:
  .then((jsonResponse) => {
    return jsonResponse;
  });
```

- First, call the fetch() function and pass it the URL as a string. The first argument determines the endpoint of the request.

- Then we chain a .then() method to the end of the fetch() function and pass it the success callback arrow function as its first argument. The success callback function takes one parameter, response. The .then() method will fire only after the promise status of fetch() has been resolved.

- Inside of the response callback function, we check the ok property of response inside of a conditional statement. In the code block of the conditional statement, we return response.json(). The reason we’re testing the ok property of the response object is that it will be a Boolean value. If there were no errors response.ok will be true and then your code will return response.json().

- Below the curly braces of the conditional statement, we create a new error with this code: `throw new Error('Request failed!');` Your code will throw this error when response.ok is falsy.

- Next we add a second argument to .then(), it will be an arrow function that will handle our failures. We separate the first callback function from the second with a comma. The second callback function takes a single parameter, networkError.

- In the code block of the second callback function, we log networkError.message to the console. If we could not reach the endpoint at all, e.g., the server is down, then we would get this networkError.

- Finally, we chain another .then() method to the end of the first .then() method. We pass the new .then() method a callback function that takes jsonResponse as its parameter and return jsonResponse. The second .then()‘s success callback won’t run until the previous .then() method has finished running. It will also not run if there was an error thrown previously.

### POST Requests using fetch()

```javascript
//sends request:
fetch('http://api-to-call.com/endpoint', {
  method: 'POST',
  body: JSON.strigify({ id: '200' }),
})
  //converts response object to JSON:
  .then(
    (response) => {
      if (response.ok) {
        return response.json();
      }
      //handles errors:
      throw new Error('Request failed!');
    },
    (networkError) => console.log(networkError.message)
  )
  //handles succes:
  .then((jsonResponse) => {
    return jsonResponse;
  });
```

- First, we call the fetch() function that takes two arguments: an endpoint and an object that contains information needed for the POST request. The rest of the request is identical to the GET request.

- The settings object we pass to the fetch() function contains two properties: method, with a value of 'POST', and body, with a value of JSON.stringify({id: '200'}). The object argument determines that this request is a POST request and what information will be sent to the API.

- Then we chain a .then() method to the end of the fetch() function and pass it the success callback arrow function as its first argument. The success callback function takes one parameter, response. The .then() method will fire only after the promise status of fetch() has been resolved.

- Inside of the response callback function, we check the ok property of response inside of a conditional statement. In the code block of the conditional statement, we return response.json(). The reason we’re testing the ok property of the response object is that it will be a Boolean value. If there were no errors response.ok will be true and then your code will return response.json().

- Below the curly braces of the conditional statement, we create a new error with this code: `throw new Error('Request failed!');` Your code will throw this error when response.ok is falsy.

- Next we add a second argument to .then(), it will be an arrow function that will handle our failures. We separate the first callback function from the second with a comma. The second callback function takes a single parameter, networkError.

- In the code block of the second callback function, we log networkError.message to the console. If we could not reach the endpoint at all, e.g., the server is down, then we would get this networkError.

- Finally, we chain another .then() method to the end of the first .then() method. We pass the new .then() method a callback function that takes jsonResponse as its parameter and return jsonResponse. The second .then()‘s success callback won’t run until the previous .then() method has finished running. It will also not run if there was an error thrown previously.

### Async GET Requests

```javascript
async function getData() {
  try {
    //sends request:
    const response = await fetch('http://api-to-call.com/endpoint');
    //handles response if succesful:
    if (response.ok) {
      const jsonResponse = await response.json();
      //code to execute with jsonResponse
    }
    //handles response if unsuccessful:
    throw new Error('Request failed!');
  } catch (error) {
    console.log(error);
  }
}
```

- First we create an arrow function using the async keyword and save it to a const getData. The async keyword will ensure that the function returns a promise.

- In the code block for getData, we add a try statement. Below the try statement’s code block, we add a catch(error) statement. The code in the try block will send a request and handle the response. The catch statement will then take care of an error if it is thrown.

- Inside the try code block, we start by using the await keyword before calling fetch(). We then have to save the returned promise in a variable called response using the const keyword. The variable will save the response of endpoint once that information has been sent back.

- Then we create a conditional statement that checks if the ok property of the response object evaluates to a truthy value.

- Inside the code block of the conditional statement, we await the resolution of calling the .json() method on response. We save the returned object to a variable called jsonResponse using the keyword const.

- Directly below we return jsonResponse. Normally, we’d want to use the information from jsonResponse in a different manner. Here we’re just practicing how to write the boilerplate code.

- Below the conditional statement, we throw a new Error with a message

- Inside the catch code block, we log the error to the console.Generally, developers create a more sophisticated way of handling the error, like redirecting their users to another page.

### Async POST Requests

```javascript
async function getData() {
  try {
    //sends request:
    const response = await fetch('http://api-to-call.com/endpoint', {
      method: 'POST',
      body: JSON.stringify({ id: '200' }),
    });
    //handles response if  succesful:
    if (response.ok) {
      const jsonResponse = await response.json();
      //code to execute with jsonResponse
    }
    //handles response if unsuccessful:
    throw new Error('Request failed!');
  } catch (error) {
    console.log(error);
  }
}
```

- First we create an arrow function using the async keyword and save it to a const getData. The async keyword will ensure that the function returns a promise.

- In the code block for getData, we add a try statement. Below the try statement’s code block, we add a catch(error) statement. The code in the try block will send a request and handle the response. The catch statement will then take care of an error if it is thrown.

- Since we are making a POST request, we should start by using the await keyword before calling the fetch() function. We will have to save the returned promise in a variable called response using the const keyword.

- In the fetch() call we pass in the url as a string for the first argument. Then as our second argument, we pass in an object. We add to it the method property with the value: 'POST'. Then we have to include a body property with the value JSON.stringify({id: 200}). Remember to separate the properties with a comma.

- Then we create a conditional statement that checks if the ok property of the response object evaluates to a truthy value.

- Inside the code block of the conditional statement, we await the resolution of calling the .json() method on response. We save the returned object to a variable called jsonResponse using the keyword const.

- Directly below we return jsonResponse. Normally, we’d want to use the information from jsonResponse in a different manner. Here we’re just practicing how to write the boilerplate code.

- Below the conditional statement, we throw a new Error with a message

- Inside the catch code block, we log the error to the console.Generally, developers create a more sophisticated way of handling the error, like redirecting their users to another page.

## Recapitulation

- There are many HTTP request methods, two of which are GET and POST.

- GET requests only request information from other sources.

- POST methods can introduce new information to other sources in addition to requesting it.

- GET and POST requests can be created a variety of ways.

- Use AJAX to asynchronously request data from APIs. The fetch() method and the async/await keywords are new functionalities developed in ES6 and ES8 respectively.

- The fetch() method is a web API that can be used to create requests. It will return promises.

- Promises are a new type of JavaScript object that represent data that will eventually be returned from a request.

- The .json() method converts a returned promise to a JSON object.

- Determining how to correctly write the requests and how to properly implement them requires carefully reading the documentation of the API with which you’re working.
