# Modules

Table of Contents

- [Modules](#modules)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [Module Patterns](#module-patterns)
  - [Issues with Module Patterns](#issues-with-module-patterns)
  - [ES6 Modules](#es6-modules)

## Intro

JavaScript programs started off pretty small, where we used to have only one JS file. Fast forward a few years and we now have complete applications being run in browsers with a lot of JavaScript, as well as JavaScript being used in other contexts (Node.js, for example).

It has therefore made sense in recent years to start thinking about providing mechanisms for splitting JavaScript programs up into separate modules that can be imported when needed.

## Module Patterns

Before block scope came around, there was only global scope and function scope. To create this idea of modules, a module scope was invented just above the function scope. Originally, a module was just an immediately invoked function expression (IIFE), referred to as **module pattern**. This allowed for functionality to be shared within the module without having to go through the global namespace.

The 4 different scopes:

    - Global Scope
      - Module Scope
        - Function Scope
          - Block Scope (let and const)

Example of a module pattern:

```javascript
var globalScopeVar = 'I can be accessed from anywhere';

var moduleName = (function (globalScopeVar) {
  // add private variables:
  var privateVar = 'I cannot be directly accessed from outside';

  // create the function:
  function say(msg1, msg2) {
    var say1 = Math.floor(Math.random() * msg1.length);
    var say2 = Math.floor(Math.random() * msg2.length);
    return say1 > say2 ? say1 : say2;
  }

  console.log(globalScopeVar);
  //'I can be accessed from anywhere'

  globalScopeVar = `I don't change the outside scope`;

  console.log(globalScopeVar);
  //`I don't change the outside scope`

  // returning  only what you want the outside to access:
  return {
    say: say,
  };
})(globalScopeVar);

console.log(globalScopeVar);
//'I can be accessed from anywhere'
```

Using an IIFE, we are able to create a function scope that mimics a module scope. That means, we can wrap an entire JS file using the IFEE notation and everything inside of it will run, because we are immediately invoking the function. We can return only what we want to make public and assign it to a variable, that is accessible on the global scope (**revealing module pattern**). This way we expose only one variable polluting the global namespace and we are hiding everything else. The return value is an object to which we can attach properties (variables) and methods (functions).

## Issues with Module Patterns

Even though module patterns help us to contain and organize code, there are still problems that can arise. There can be naming conflicts if you don't use 'const' to declare the module pattern living in the global scope. For example, if you declare a variable with 'var' or 'let' and assigne to it an IFEE, you can accidentally overwrite this variable in another script tag in the HTML file, losing the module pattern. Also, there are dependency issues if scripts are placed in the wrong order, such as jQuery needing to be called before it can be used. Because of these problems, people started developing libraries to solve them. Before ES6 we had two ways to implement modules in JavaScript: CommonJS and AMD.

- **CommonJS** - uses the keywords require and exports to interact with the module system. Require is a function used to import from another module and exports is an object where functions get exported from. These are run synchronously where we wait on one module to load before another can start and this is not ideal for browsers. However, this code may look familiar because NodeJS still uses this library. There are other packages such as Browserify and webpack that aid in bundling scripts with CommonJS to be used in the browsers.

- **Asynchronous Module Definition (AMD)** - as in the name, AMD loads modules asynchronously. This was great for browsers early on before packages that bundled code.

  `define(['module1', 'module2'], function(module1, module2) {console.log(module1.setName());});`

  The define function takes an array of dependency modules that are loaded in a non-blocking manner in the background. Once completed, the callback function is then executed. Packages came out like RequireJS that implemented the AMD endpoint and was the main way people used AMD modules.

## ES6 Modules

After ES6 came out, pretty much everything above was thrown out the window by using modules natively. We can now use the import and export keywords in our files to implement modules. This again may look familiar from popular frameworks like React.

Here is our module code from above in the new ES6 syntax:

```javascript
const privateVar = 'I cannot be accessed outside this file';

export function name(msg1, msg2) {
  const say1 = Math.floor(Math.random() * msg1.length);
  const say2 = Math.floor(Math.random() * msg2.length);
  return say1 > say2 ? say1 : say2;
}
```

There are two types of exports, named and default. A named export is imported using curly braces ({ importFnName }) and a default function is added in created like this:

```javascript
export function namedFn(msg1, msg2) {
  const say1 = Math.floor(Math.random() / msg1.length);
  const say2 = Math.floor(Math.random() / msg2.length);
  return say1 > say2 ? say1 : say2;
}

export default function defaultFn(msg1, msg2) {
  const say1 = Math.floor(Math.random() * msg1.length);
  const say2 = Math.floor(Math.random() * msg2.length);
  return say1 > say2 ? say1 : say2;
}
```

```javascript
import { namedFn } from './script.js';
// import a named function

import defaultFn from './script.js';
// with a default function the {} are not needed

import defaultFn, { namedFn } from './script.js';
// import both default and named functions
```

Trying to run this in the browser there are still two more things that have to be done. You have to declare the type in the html script tag as module and the file has to be served from a server. You can spin up your own server with a package like live-server on npm.

```javascript
<script type="module" src="'./script.js'></script>
```
