# Error Handling

Table of Contents

- [Error Handling](#error-handling)
  - [Intro](#intro)
  - [Synchronous and Asynchronous](#synchronous-and-asynchronous)
  - [Types of Error Constructors](#types-of-error-constructors)
  - [Extend Error Constructors](#extend-error-constructors)

## Intro

One of the most important things to learn in being a developer is how to solve errors. Learning to handle errors makes you a better programmer.

## Synchronous and Asynchronous

Writing your programs you have the ability to use the **'throw'** keyword to throw an error and stop the program. You can handle that error by using a try/catch block that has an optional finally block. You can also use the .catch() method for asynchronous code. Throwing a new error in asynchronous code gets what is called a silent fail if there is no catch block present. In synchronous code, if there is no catch statement placed in the code, the runtime will create catch: onerror() and we see the built in JavaScript error message in red.

- throw an error:

```javascript
throw new Error();
```

- synchronous try/catch/finally block:

```javascript
function fail() {
  try {
    console.log('this works');
    throw new Error('ups!!!');
  } catch (error) {
    console.log('we have made an ups', error);
  } finally {
    console.log('still good');
  }
}

fail();
// this works
// we have made an ups Error: ups at fail
// still good
```

- asynchronous .catch():

```javascript
Promise.reject('asyncfail')
  .then((response) => {
    console.log(response);
    return response;
  })
  .catch((error) => {
    console.log(error); // asyncfail
  });
```

- asynchronous try/catch block within async function:

```javascript
async function fail() {
  try {
    await Promise.resolve('ups #1');
    await Promise.reject('ups #2');
  } catch (err) {
    console.log(err);
  }
  console.log('is this still good?');
}

fail();
// Promise {} (promise resolved)
// ups #2
// is this still good?
```

## Types of Error Constructors

Besides the generic Error constructor, there are seven other built in error constructors.

- **EvalError** - an error with the global function eval().
- **InternalError** - an error in the JavaScript engine is thrown. Usually when something is too large.
- **RangeError** - an error when a numeric variable or parameter is outside of its valid range.
- **ReferenceError** - an error that occurs when referencing something invalid. E.g. When a variable is used before it is declared.
- **SyntaxError** - an error that occurs in parsing, the engine does not understand what is written.
- **TypeError** - an error when a variable is not the correct type.
- **URIError** - an error when encodeURI() or decodeURI() are passed invalid parameters.

Errors created using the new keyword come with 3 properties:

- **name** - the name of the error.
- **message** - the parameter given to the error.
- **stack** - the stack trace or callback queue when the error occurred that also includes the line and character number where the error happened.

```javascript
const myError = new Error('fail');

myError.name; // "Error"
myError.message; // "fail"
myError.stack; // "Error: fail at <anonymous>:1:17

function a() {
  const b = new Error('ups');
  return b;
}

b();

//b().stack gets console loged:
// Error: ups
// at a (<anonymous>:2:12)
// at <anonymous>:1:1
```

## Extend Error Constructors

Because Error is a constructor function, we can use that to extend it and add to it. You don't want to reveal parts of your program by allowing an error to give the stack trace and other information to possible bad actors. So, you can customize what you want your errors to reveal.

```javascript
class AuthenticationError extends Error {
  constructor(message) {
    super(message);
    this.name = 'AuthenticationError';
    this.message = 'authentication problem';
    this.fix = 'please log in';
  }
}

const err = new AuthenticationError('ups');

console.log(err);
// authenticationError: "authentication problem" stack trace

err.fix;
// please log in
```
